CHAPTER 1 
INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
Article 1.1 
Establishment of a Free Trade Area 
The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and 
Article V of GATS, hereby establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement. 
Article 1.2 
Relation to Other Agreements 
1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to 
each other under existing international agreements to which both 
Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement. 
2. If a Party considers that a provision of this Agreement is inconsistent with a provision of another agreement to which it and the other Party 
are party, the Parties shall, on request, consult with a view to reaching 
a mutually satisfactory solution. This paragraph is without prejudice 
to a Party’s rights and obligations under Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement).
1 
3. For as long as the Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland to the 
Agreement on the Withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, signed in London and Brussels on 24 January 2020 (the “Protocol”) is in force,
2 nothing in this Agreement 
shall preclude the United Kingdom from adopting or maintaining measures, or refraining from doing so, further to the Protocol, and 
amendments thereto and subsequent agreements replacing parts 
thereof, provided that such measures, or the absence of such measures, are not used as a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination against the other Party or as a disguised restriction on trade. 
1 For the purposes of application of this Agreement, the Parties agree that the fact that an 
agreement provides more favourable treatment of goods, services, investments or persons than 
that provided for under this Agreement does not mean that there is an i nconsistency within the 
meaning of paragraph 2.
2 The Parties note in particular that arrangements for democratic consent specified at Article 
18 of the Protocol may result in Articles 5 through 10, and other provisions of the Protocol 
dependent on the sam e Articles for their application, ceasing to apply to the United Kingdom 
in accordance with the arrangements specified at Article 18. 
 4. On request of either Party, the Parties shall hold consultations, in 
relation to the effects of a measure described in paragraph 3 the United 
Kingdom has adopted, or absence thereof,3 on this Agreement and seek 
a mutually acceptable solution.4 
Article 1.3 
Laws and regulations and their amendments 
Where reference is made in this Agreement to laws or 
regulations of a Party, those laws or regulations shall be understood to 
include amendments thereto and successor laws or regulations, unless otherwise specified. 
Article 1.4 
General Definitions 
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise provided 
in this Agreement: 
“AD Agreement” means the Agreement on Implementation of Article 
VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A 
to the WTO Agreement; 
“Agreement” means the Free Trade Agreement between the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Australia; “Agreement on Safeguards” means the Agreement on Safeguards, in 
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; “central level of government” means: (a) for Australia, the Commonwealth Government; and 
(b) for the United Kingdom, her Majesty’s Government of the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; 
“Joint Committee” means the Australia-United Kingdom Joint 
Committee established under Article 29.1 (Establishment of the Joint 
Committee – Administrative and Institutional Provisions); 
3 For greater certainty, this refers to a measure described in paragraph 3 which is adopted after 
entry into force of this Agreement or the absence of such measure.
4 This paragraph is without prejudice to Article 28.5 (Provision of Information -Transparen cy 
and Anti- Corruption). 
 “covered investment” means, with respect to a Party, an investment in 
its territory of an investor of the other Party in existence as of the date 
of entry into force of this Agreement, or established, acquired, or expanded thereafter; 
“customs authority” means: 
(a) for Australia, the Department of Home Affairs, or its 
successor; and 
(b) for the United Kingdom, Her Majesty’s Revenue and 
Customs or its successor or where relevant, any other 
authority responsible for customs matters within its 
territory. For greater certainty, with respect to the 
provisions of this Agreement which apply to the 
Bailiwick of Guernsey, the Bailiwick of Jersey or the 
Isle of Man, ‘customs authority’ shall also mean: 
(i) with respect to the Bailiwick of Jersey, the Jersey 
Customs & Immigration Service or its successor;  
(ii)  with respect to the Bailiwick of Guernsey, 
Guernsey Customs & Excise or its successor; 
and 
(iii)  with respect to the Isle of Man, the Customs and 
Excise Division, Isle of Man Treasury or its 
successor; 
“customs duty” includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed on or 
in connection with the importation of a good, including any form of 
surtax or surcharge imposed on or in connection with such importation, 
but does not include any: 
(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed 
consistently with Article III:2 of GATT 1994; 
(b) fee or other charge in connection with the importation 
commensurate with the cost of services rendered; or 
(c) antidumping or countervailing duty 
applied consistently with the provisions of Article VI of 
GATT 1994, the Anti -dumping Agreement, and the 
SCM Agreement; 
“Customs Valuation Agreement” means the Agreement on 
Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; 
 “days” means calendar days; 
“enterprise” means any entity constituted or organised under applicable 
law, whether or not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally 
owned or controlled, including any corporation, trust, partnership, sole 
proprietorship, joint venture, association or similar organisation; 
“existing” means in effect on the date of entry into force of this 
Agreement; 
“GATS ” means the General Agreement on Trade in Services in Annex 
1B to the WTO Agreement; “GATT 1994” means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement. For greater certainty, 
references in this Agreement to articles in the GATT 1994 include the 
interpretative notes;  
“good” means any merchandise, product, article, or material; “goods of a Party” means domestic products as these are understood in 
GATT 1994 or such goods as the Parties may agree, and includes 
originating goods of a Party; 
“government procurement” means the process by which a government 
obtains the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination 
thereof, for governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial 
sale or resale or use in the production or supply of goods or services for 
commercial sale or resale; 
“Harmonized System (HS)” means the Harmonized Commodity 
Description and Coding System, including its General Rules of 
Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter Notes, and Subheading Notes as 
adopted and implemented by the Parties in their respective laws; 
“heading” means the first four digits in the tariff classification number 
under the Harmonized System; 
“measure” includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or 
practice; 
“national” means: 
(a) for Australia, a natural person who is an Australian 
citizen as defined in the Australian Citizenship Act 2007 
(Cth) or a permanent resident; and 
 (b) for the United Kingdom, a British citizen in 
accordance with its applicable laws and regulations, or a permanent resident; 
“originating” means qualifying as originating under the rules of origin 
in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures); 
“person” means a natural person or an enterprise; “person of a Party” means a national or an enterprise of a Party; “regional level of government” means: 
(a) for Australia, a state of Australia, the Australian Capital 
Territory or the Northern Territory; 
(b) for the United Kingdom: 
(i) England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales; or 
(ii) Her Majesty’s Government of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
in respect of England, Northern 
Ireland, Scotland or Wales but not the United Kingdom as a whole; 
“recovered material” means a material comprising one or more 
individual parts that results from: 
(a) the disassembly of a used good into individual parts; 
and 
(b) the cleaning, testing or other processing of those individual parts as necessary for improvement to sound 
working condition; 
“remanufactured good” means a good classified in HS Chapters 84 
through 90, or under heading 94.02, except a good classified under HS 
headings 87.02, 87.03, 87.04, 87.05, 87.11 and 87.16, or 
subheading 8701.20
5 that: 
5 For greater certainty, the references to the tariff classification number of the Harmonized 
System in this definition are based on the Harmonized System, as amended on 1 January 
2017. 
 (a) is entirely or partially comprised of parts that 
are recovered materials; 
(b) has similar life expectancy, working conditions and 
performance to the equivalent good in new condition; 
and 
(c)  is given  a warranty in substance the same as the 
equivalent good in new condition; 
“sanitary or phytosanitary measure” means any measure referred to in paragraph 1 of Annex A to the SPS Agreement; 
“SCM Agreement” means the Agreement on Subsidies and 
Countervailing Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; “SME ” means a small and medium-sized enterprise, including a micro-
sized enterprise; “SPS Agreement” means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary 
and Phytosanitary Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; “state enterprise” means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled 
through ownership interests, by a Party; 
“subheading” means the first six digits in the tariff classification 
number under the Harmonized System; 
“TBT Agreement” means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to 
Trade, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; “Trade Facilitation Agreement” means the Agreement on Trade 
Facilitation, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; “territory” means: 
(a) for Australia, the territory of Australia: (i) excluding all external territories other than the 
Territory of Norfolk Island, the Territory of 
Christmas Island, the Territory of Cocos 
(Keeling) Islands, the Territory of Ashmore and 
Cartier Islands, the Territory of Heard Island and 
McDonald Islands, and the Coral Sea Islands 
Territory; and 
(ii)  including Australia’s territorial sea, contiguous 
zone, exclusive economic zone and continental 
 shelf over which Australia exercises sovereign 
rights or jurisdiction in accordance with 
international law, particularly the United 
Natio ns Convention on the Law of the Sea, done 
at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982; 
(b) for the United Kingdom: 
(i) the territory of the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland including its 
territorial sea and airspace; 
(ii) all the areas beyond the territorial sea of the 
United Kingdom, including the sea-bed and 
subsoil of those areas, over which the United 
Kingdom may exercise sovereign rights or 
jurisdiction in accordance with international 
law; 
(iii) the Bailiwicks of Guernsey and Jersey and the 
Isle of Man (including their airspace and the 
territorial sea adjacent to them), territories for 
whose international relations the United 
Kingdom is responsible, as regards: 
(A) Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods); 
(B) Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin 
Procedures); 
(C) Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and 
Trade Facilitation); 
(D) Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures); and 
(E) Chapter 25 (Animal Welfare and 
Antimicrobial Resistance); 
(iv) any territory for whose international relations 
the United Kingdom is responsible and to which 
this Agreement is extended in accordance with 
Article 32.4 (Territorial Extension – Final 
Provisions); 
“TRIPS Agreement” means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects 
of Intellectual Property Rights , in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement, 
as revised or amended from time to time by a revision or amendment 
 that applies to the Parties and including any waiver of any provision 
thereof granted by Members of the WTO; 
“WTO” means the World Trade Organization; and “WTO Agreement” means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the 
World Trade Organization, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994. 
   CHAPTER 2 
 
TRADE IN GOODS  
 
 
Article 2.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 “consular transactions ” means the procedure of obtaining from a consul of  
the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party, or in the territory 
of a non- party, a  consular invoice or a  consular visa  for a commercial invoice, 
certificate of origin, manifest, shippers’ export declaration, or any other customs documentation in connection with the importation of the good;  
 “export licensing procedure” means an administrative procedure  requiring 
the submission of an application or other documentation, other than that 
generally required for customs clearance purposes, to the relevant 
administrative body of the exporting Party as a prior condition for exportation 
from the territory of the exporting Party;  
 
“Import Licensing Agreement” means the Agreement on Import Licensing 
Procedures, set out in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;  and 
 “import licensing procedure ” means an administrative procedure requiring 
the submission of an application or other documentation, other than that generally required for customs clearance purposes, to the relevant administrative body of the importing Party as a prior condition for importation into the territory of the importing Party . 
  
Article 2.2 
Scope  
 
Unless otherwise provided, this Chapter applies to trade in goods of 
a Party.  
  
Article 2.3 
National Treatment  
 
Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other 
Party in accordance with Article III of GATT 1994, and to this end Article III of GATT 1994 is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis .  Article 2.4 
Classification of Goods 
 
The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in 
conformity with the Harmonized System.  
 
 
Article 2.5 
Treatment  of Customs Duties  
 1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall increase any  
customs duty existing on entry into force or adopt any new customs duty, on 
an originating good. 
 2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively  
reduce or eliminate  its customs duties on originating goods  in accordance 
with its Schedule to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments).  
 3. Where and for so long as a Party’s applied most -favoured- nation customs 
duty rate for a particular good is lower than the rate  applicable pursuant to 
paragraph 2 above, the Party shall apply the lower rate to originating goods 
of the other Party classified under the same tariff line as the  particular good. 
 4. On the request of a Party, the Parties shall consult to consider accelerating  or 
broadening the scope of  the elimination  or reduction of customs duties set 
out in their Sc hedules to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments).  
 5. A Party may at any time unilaterally accelerate the elimination  or reduction 
of customs duties set out in its Schedule to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments) 
on originating goods of the other Party.  The Party shall inform the other 
Party as early as practicable before the new rate of customs duty takes effect.  
 6. For greater certainty, a Party may raise a customs duty to the level established by its Schedule to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments) following any unilateral reduction. 
  
Article 2.6 
Goods Re- entered after Repair or Alteration  
 1. Neither Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that re -enters the Party’s territory after that good has been temporarily 
exported from the Party’s territory to the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration, regardless of whether that repair or alteration could have been performed in the territory of the Party from which the good was exported for repair or alterat ion or increased the value of the good.  2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to a good where, prior to the good’s export to the 
other Party for repair or alteration, the good:  
 
(a) was not in free circulation in the exporting Party; and  
 (b) did not have a customs duty applied to it by the exporting Party. 
 3. Neither Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, admitted temporarily from the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration.  
 4. For the purposes of this Article, “repair or alteration” does not include an operation or process that:  
 
(a) destroys the essential characteristics of a good or creates a new or 
commercially different good; 
 (b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good; or  (c) substantially changes the technical performance or  the function of a 
good. 
 
 
Article 2.7 
Application of Non -Tariff Measures 
 
1. A Party shall not adopt or maintain any non- tariff measure on the importation 
of any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any good destined for 
the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its WTO rights and obligations or in accordance with this Agreement.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure details of its non -tariff measures permitted in 
paragraph 1 of this Article are made available in a manner as to enable 
interested parties to become acquainted with them. 
  
Article 2.8 
Technical Consultations on Non- Tariff Measures 
 1. Subject to paragraph 2, a Party may request technical consultations with the other Party on a non- tariff measure covered by Article 2.7 (Application of 
Non-Tariff Measures) where it considers the non- tariff measure to be 
adversely affecting its trade.  The request shall be in writing and shall clearly 
identify the non- tariff measure, explain how the non- tariff measure adversely 
affects trade between the Parties, and, if possible, provide suggested solutions.  2. Where a non -tariff measure is covered by another Chapter which provides 
for a consultation mechanism with the other Party, that consultation 
mechanism shall be used, unless otherwise agreed between the Parties.  
 3. Within 30 days of receipt of a request under paragraph 1, the responding Party sha ll provide a written reply to the requesting Party.  
 4.  Within 30 days of the requesting Party’s receipt of the reply, the Parties shall enter into technical consultations with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution.  
 5.  If the requesting Pa rty considers that the subject of the request under 
paragraph 1 is urgent or involves perishable goods, it may request that technical consultations take place within a shorter time frame than that provided for under paragraph 2.  The responding Party shall  give prompt and 
reasonable consideration to that request.  
 6.  The technical consultations under this Article shall be without prejudice to each Party’s rights and obligations pertaining to dispute settlement proceedings under Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) and the WTO 
Agreement.  
  
Article 2.9 
Import and Export Restrictions  
 
Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall 
adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of  any 
good of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good 
destined for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with Article XI of GATT 1994, and to th is end, Article XI of GATT 1994 is i ncorporated 
into and made part of this Agreement mutatis mutandis . 
  
Article 2.10  
Import Licensing  
 1. Neither Party shall adopt or maintain a measure that is inconsistent with  the 
Import Licensing Agreement. 
 2. A Party shall publish on an official government website any new or modified import licensing procedure, including any information that it is required to publish under Article 1.4(a) of the Import Licensing Agreement.  To the 
extent possible, the Party shal l do so at least 21 days before the new procedure 
or modification takes effect.  
 3. In respect of any import licensing procedures, each Party’s notifications to the WTO Committee on Import Licensing under the Import Licensing  Agreement shall describe any l imitations on permissible end users of the 
product and any conditions the Party imposes on eligibility for obtaining a 
licence to import the product. 
 4. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall, with regard to any import licensing procedures that it has adopted or maintains, or changes to existing 
import licensing procedures:  
 
(a) promptly provide the information specified in Article 5(2) of the Import Licensing Agreement , where that information has not been 
notified to the WTO Committee on Import Licensing provided for in 
Article 4 of the Import Licensing Agreement; and  
 (b) promptly and to the extent possible provide any other relevant information . 
  
Article 2.11 
Administrative Fees and Formalities  
 1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of GATT 1994, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than export taxes, custom duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge applied consisten tly with Article III:2 of GATT 1994, and antidumping and 
countervailing duties) imposed on or in connection with importation or 
exportation are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered, and do not represent an indirect protection to domestic goods of a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes.  
 2. Neither Party shall require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of a good of the other Party. 
 3. Each Party shall make publicly available online a current list of the fees and charges it imposes in connection with importation or exportation, including 
any updates or changes to such fees and charges.   An adequate time period 
shall be accorded between the publication of new or amended fees and charges and their entry into force, except in urgent circumstances.  Such fees 
and charges shall not be applied until information on them including the reason for such fees and charges, the responsible authority , and when and 
how payment is to be made, has been published. 
  
Article 2.12 
Export Duties, Taxes or Other Charges  
 
Neither  Party shall adopt or maintain any duty, tax, or other charge 
on the export of any good to the territory of the other Party, unless the duty, 
tax, or other charge is also applied  to a like good destined for domestic  consumption.  For the purpose s of this Article, charges shall not include fees 
or other charges imposed in accordance with Article 2.11 (Administrative 
Fees and Formalities).  
 
 
Article 2.13 
Export Subsidies  
 
The Parties affirm their WTO commitments not to adopt or maintain 
an export subsidy on any good. 
 
 
Article 2.14 
Export Licensing  
 1. Within 60 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party 
shall notify the other Party of its existing export licensing procedures .  A 
Party shall be deemed to have complied with this paragraph if it has notified its export licensing procedures consistent with a Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions adopted by the WTO Council for Trade in Goods. 
 2. Each Party shall publish any new export licensing procedure, or any modification to an existing export licensing procedure.  Such publication 
shall take place no later than 30 days after the procedure or modification takes effect.  
 3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article requires a Party to grant an export licence, or prevents a Party from implementing its obligations under any international agreement, including but not limited to those  under United 
Nations Security Council Resolutions, as well as its commitments under multilateral non -proliferation regimes and export control arrangements 
including, but not limited to the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual -Use Goods and Technologies  done at The 
Hague on 19 December 1995, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia 
Group, and the Missile Technology Control Regime.  
  
Article 2.15 
Remanufactured Goods  
 1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, neither Party shall accord to a remanufactured good of the other Party treatment that is less favourable than that it accords to  equivalent goods in new condition. 
 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to consumer guarantees provided for in a Party’s laws and regulations.  3. If a Party adopts or maintains import and export prohibi tions or restrictions 
on used goods on the basis that they are used goods, it shall not apply those 
measures to remanufactured goods.   For greater certainty, Article 2.9 (Import 
and Export Restrictions) shall apply to prohibitions and restrictions on the importation of remanufactured goods. 
 
4. Subject to its obligations under this Agreement and the WTO Agreement, a Party may require that remanufactured goods be identified as such for distribution or sale in its territory and that they meet all applicable technical 
requirements that apply to equivalent goods in new condition. 
  
Article 2.16 
Committee on Trade in Goods  
 
1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods ( “the Goods 
Committee ”), composed of government representatives of each Party.  
 2. The Goods Committee's functions shall include:  
(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter, Chapter 3 (Trade Remedies), Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin), 
and Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation);  
 (b) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through consultations on accelerating tariff elimination or reduction under this Agreement, and addressing non- tariff barriers on the importation of 
any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any good destined for the territory of the other Party ; 
 (c) addressing issues relating to the administration and operation of tariff rate quotas and the application of product specific safeguard measures;  
 (d) receiving reports from, and reviewing the work of, the Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation  
established under Article 4.29 (Working Group on Rules of Origin 
and Customs and Trade Facilitation – Rules of Origin and Origin 
Procedures) ;  
 (e) reporting, as needed, on its activities and work programme to the Joint Committee;  
 (f) facilitating trade in remanufactured goods, including considering amendments or modifications to the provisions of this Agreement relating to the treatment of remanufacture d goods, with a view to 
broadening the types of goods that may be considered remanufactured  goods, having regard to factors including technological developments 
and the Parties’ shared environmental objectives; 
 
(g) reviewing the future amendments to the Harmonized System and endeavouring to resolve any differences that may arise between the Parties on matters related to the classification of goods under the Harmonized System and Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments);  
 
(h) determining the procedures and specific data requirements, as appropriate, for any exchange of trade data; and  
 
(i) undertaking any other work that the Joint Committee assigns to it.  
 3. The Goods Committee shall meet at the request of either Party and in any event within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Meetings may occur in person, or by any other means as mutually determined by the Parties. 
 4. The Goods Committee may establish technical working groups to consider any matter relating to this Chapter that creates disruption or may affect trade in goods between the Parties.  Any technical working group established shall 
report to the Goods Committe e on progress of its work.  CHAPTER 3 
 
TRADE REMEDIES  
 
 
Section  A 
General Provisions 
 
 
Article 3.1 
Definitions  
 
 For the purposes of this Chapter:   
 “bilateral safeguard measure” means a measure referred to in paragraph 2 of 
Article 3.6 (Application of a Bilateral Safeguard M easure) ; 
 “customs duty reduction or elimination” means any customs duty reduction or elimination in accordance with  paragraph 2 of Article  2.5 ( Treatment  of Customs 
Duties  – Trade in Goods);  
 “domestic industry” means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as 
a whole of the like or directly competitive good operating within the territory of 
a Party, or those whose collective output of the like or directly competit ive good 
constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of the good;  “serious injury” means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic industry;  
 “threat of serious injury” means serious injury that  is clearly imminent , in 
accordance with the provisions of Article 3.8 (Investigation Procedure).   A 
determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury shall be based on facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture, or remote possibility; and  
  “transition period” means, in relation to a good, the entry into force of this Agreement until five years after the completion of the customs duty reduction or 
elimination in relation to  the good.  Section  B 
Anti -dumping and Countervailing Measures  
 
 
Article 3.2 
General Provision 
 
Except as provided in this Section, e ach Party affirms its rights and 
obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, the AD Agreement , and the SCM 
Agreement.   
  
Article 3.3 
Investigations  
 1.  After receipt by a Party’s investigating authority of a properly documented application for an anti -dumping investigation or a countervailing duty 
investigation with respect to imports from the other Party and  before initiating 
an investigation, the importing  Party shall provide written notification to
 the 
other Party of its receipt of the application .  
 2.  Without prejudice to its other rights and obligations under the SCM Agreement, prior to initiating a countervailing duty investigation against imports from the 
other Party, the importing Party shall afford to the other Party a reasonable opportunity to consult with the aim of clarifying the situation on matters raised in the application and arriving at a mutually agreed solution.  Any such 
consultations shall not unnecessarily delay or prevent a Party from proceeding expeditiously to initiate and conduct an investigation. 
  3. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under Articles 6.2 and 6.3 of the AD Agreement and Article 12.2 of the SCM Agreement, including with res pect 
to the rights of interested parties to present information orally and to defend their interests in the conduct of an anti -dumping investigation or a countervailing duty 
investigation. 
 
 4.  Each Party shall ensure, before a final determination is made, full and meaningful disclosure of all essential facts under consideration which form the basis for the decision whether to apply definiti ve measures in an anti -dumping 
investigation or a countervailing duty investigation.  This is without prejudice to 
Article 6.5 of the AD Agreement  and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement . 
Disclosures shall be made in writing, and allow interested parties sufficient time to defend their interests .  Article 3.4 
Lesser- duty R ule 
 
Each Party ’s investigating authority may consider whether the amount of 
the anti -dumping or countervailing duty to be imposed shall be the full margin 
of dumping or  total amount of the  subsidy or a lesser amount, in accordance with 
the Party ’s laws and regulations.  
 
 
Section  C 
Global Safeguard Measures 
  
Article 3.5 
General Provisions and T ransparency  
 1. E xcept as provided in this Section, nothing in this Agreement affects either 
Party’s rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards. 
 
2. A Party that initiates a safeguard investigatory process shall provide to the other  
Party  an electronic copy of  any notification given to the WTO Committee on 
Safeguards under Article 12.1 of the Agree ment on Safeguards.  
 3.  To the extent permitted by the Agreement  on Safeguards, when imposing 
safeguard measures, each Party shall endeavour to impose them in a way that 
least affects bilateral trade.   
  
Section D  
Bilateral Safeguard Measures 
  
Article 3.6 
Application  of a Bilateral Safeguard M easure  
 1.  
 If, as a result of customs duty reduction or  elimination,  an originating good of 
the other Party is being imported into the territory  of a Party  in such increased 
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such 
conditions as to cause serious injury or threat of serious injury, the importing 
Party may apply a safeguard provided for in paragraph 2 to the extent necessary 
to prevent or remedy the serious injury and to facilitate the adjustment of the 
domestic industry.  2.   In accordance with paragraph 1, the importing Party may apply one of the 
following bilateral safeguard measures: 
 
(a)  a suspension of the f urther customs duty reduction or elimination in 
relation to  the good; or 
 
(b)  an increase in the rate of  customs duty on the good to a level that does 
not exceed the lesser of:  
 
(i)  the most -favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty in effect at 
the time the measure is applied; or 
 (ii)  the most -favoured- nation applied rate of  customs duty on the 
good in effect on the day immediately preceding the date of entry 
into force of this Agreement. 
  
Article 3.7 
Duration and Scope  
 1.  A Party  shall  apply a bilateral safeguard measure only for such period of time  as 
may be  necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate  the 
adjustment of the domestic industry.
 
 
2. The period referred to in paragraph 1 shall not exceed  two years , except that the 
period may be extended by no more than two years  if the competent authority of  
the Party that applies the measure determines,  in conformity with the procedures 
set out in Article  3.8 (Investigation Procedure), that the  bilateral safeguard 
measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustm ent. 
 
3. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a bilateral safeguard measure is more than one year,  the Party that applies the 
measure shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals  during its period of 
application.  
 
 
4.  Neither Party shall  apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a good that has already 
been subject to a bilateral safeguard measure for a period of time equal to the 
duration of the previous safeguard or one year  after its termination, whichever is 
longer.   
  
5.  When a Party  terminates  a bilateral safeguard measure on a good, the rate of  
customs duty for that good shall be the  rate that would have been in effect in 
accordance with the Party’s S chedule to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments) but 
for the bilateral safeguard measure.    
 6.     Neither Party shall  apply  or maintain a bilateral safeguard measure after the          
transition period.  
  
 
Article 3.8 
Investigation Procedure 
 
1. A Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure only following an investigation by the Party’s competent authorit y in accordance with the same procedures as 
those provided for in Articles 3 and 4.2 of the Safeguards Agreement; to this end, Articles 3 and 4.2 of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis . 
 2.
 An investigation shall not exceed one year, but a Party may, in exceptional circumstances, and as mutually agreed with the other Party , extend the 
investigation for no more than the time necessary to complete the investigation.  The other Party should not unreasonably withhold its agreement to the extension.   
  
Article 3.9 
Notification and Consultation 
 1.   A Party shall provide written notice to the other Party immediately after:  
 
(a)  initiating an investigation referred to in Article 3.8 (Investigation 
Procedure); 
 
(b)  making a finding of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by increased imports  of an originating good of  the other Party as a result of 
a customs duty reduction or elimination in relation to the good; 
 
(c)  taking a decision to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure; or  
 
(d)  taking a decision to modify a bilateral safeguard measure for progressive 
libera lisation.  
 2. A Party shall provide promptly to the other Party a copy of the public version of the report of its competent authority following the conclusion of its investigation as set out under Article 3.8  (Investigation Procedure).  
 
3.   The Party providing a written notice referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide the 
other Party with all pertinent information, which shall include:  (a)  in the written notice referred to in subparagraph 1(a), the reason for the 
initiation of the investigation, a precise description of the good subject to the investigation (including its subheading in the Harmonized System), 
the importation period subject to the investigation, and the date of initiation of the investigation; and  
 
(b)  in the written notice referred to in subparagraphs  1(b) through (d), the 
evidence of the serious injury or the threat of serious injury caused by the increased imports of the good as a result of the customs duty reduction or elimination, a precise description of the good subject to the proposed 
bilateral safeguard measure (including its subheading in  the Harmonized 
System ), a precise description of the bilateral safeguard measure, and, as 
applicable, the proposed date of the introduction,  extension, or 
modification of the bilateral safeguard measure, its expected duration, 
and the timetable for the progressive liberalisation of the measure.   In the 
case of an extension of a bilateral safeguard measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is adjusting shall also be provided. 
 4.   A Party proposing to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure shall provide  
adequate opportunity for prior consultations with the other Party with a view to reviewing the information provided under subparagraph 3(b), exchanging views 
on the bilateral safeguard measure, and reaching an agreement on compensation 
set out in Article 3.11 (Compensation).   
  
Article 3.10
 
Provisional Application  of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure   
 
1.  In critical circumstances, a Party may  apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a 
provisional basis if:  
 
(a)  delay would cause damage to a domestic industry that would be difficult to repair; and  
 
 
(b)  the Party’s competent authority makes a preliminary determination  that 
there is  clear evidenc e that imports of an originating  good of the other 
Party have increased as the result of the customs duty reduction or elimination in relation to the good, and that  those increased  imports have 
caused or are threatening to cause serious injury . 
 
 
2. Before  applying a bilateral safeguard measure on a provisional basis the applying 
Party  shall provide  written notice  to the other Party.   Consultation between the 
Parties on the application  of the measure on a provisional basis shall be initiated 
immediately after the measure is applied.  3. A bilateral safeguard measure applied on a provisional basis shall not be 
maintained for more than 200 days .  The duration of  a bilateral safeguard applied 
on a provisional basis shall be counted as part of the period described in 
paragraph 2 of Article 3.7 (Duration and Scope).  
 
4. The increase in customs duty paid as a result of the  application  of the bilateral 
safeguard measur e on a provisional basis shall be promptly refunded if the 
Party’s competent authority, in the investigation referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.8 (Investigation Procedure), does not determine that the increase in 
imports of the good subject to the mea sure has caused  or threatened to cause  
serious injury.
 
  
Article 3.11 
Compensation 
 1. A Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall , in consultation with the 
other Party, provide mutually agreed trade liberalising compensation in the form 
of concessions having substantially equivalent trade  effects or  equivalent to the 
value of the additional duties expected to result from the bilateral safeguard 
measure.   The Party shall provide an opportunity for those consultations no later 
than 30 days after the application  or the extension of the bilateral safeguard 
measure. 
 2. If the consultations under paragraph 1 do not result in the Parties agreeing  on 
trade liberalising compensation within 30 days, the Party against whose good the 
bilateral safeguard measure is applied may suspend the application of 
substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party  applying  the 
bilateral safeguard measu re. 
 
3. The Party against whose good the bilateral safeguard measure is applied shall 
notify the other Party in writing at least 30 days before it suspends concessions in accordance with paragraph 2.  
 4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 1 and the right to suspend concessions under paragraph 2 terminates on the termination of the 
bilateral safeguard measure. 
  
Article 3.12 
Non-cumulation  
 1.  Neither Party shall apply or maintain  two or more of the following measures, 
with respect to  the same good at the same time:  (a)  a bilateral safeguard measure;  
 
(b)  a safeguard measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the 
Agreement on Safeguards;  
 
(c)  a safeguard measure under the Agreement on Agriculture , in Annex 1A 
to the WTO Agreement ;  
 
(d)  a product -specific safeguard under the Party’s Schedule to Annex 2A 
(Tariff Commitments). 
  
Article 3.13 
Non-application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under Section B or C.CHAPTER 4  
 
RULES OF ORIGIN AND ORIGIN PROCEDURES  
 
 
Section A  
Rules of Origin  
  
Article 4.1  
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
 
“aquaculture”  means the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs, 
crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants from seed stock, including seed stock imported from non- parties, such as eggs, fry, fingerlings, or 
larvae, parr, smolts, or other  immature fish at a post -larval stage, by intervention in 
the rearing or growth processes to enhance production such as regular stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;    
  
“fungible goods or materials”  means goods or materials that are interchangeable 
for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical, irrespective of minor differences in appearance that are not relevant to a determination of origin;  
 “generally accepted accounting principles”  means  those  principles recognised by 
consensus or with substantial authoritative support in the territory of a Party with respect to the recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities; the disclosure of information; and the preparation of financial statements.    These 
principles may encompass broad guidelines for general application, as well as detailed standards, practices, and procedures;  
 “indirect material” means a material  used in the production, testing, or inspection 
of a good but not physically incorporat ed into the good; or a material used in the 
maintenance of buildings or the operation of equipment, associated with the production of a good, including:  
  
(a)  fuel, energy, catalysts, and solvents;  
 
(b)  equipment, devices, and supplies used to test or inspect the good;  
  
(c)  gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment, and supplies;  
  
(d)  tools, dies, and moulds;  
  
(e)  spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;  
  (f)  lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used 
in production or used to operate equipment and buildings; and  
  
(g)  any other material that is not incorporated into the good but the use of which in the production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part of that production;  
 
“material” means a good that is used in the production of another good;  “non- originating good” or “non- originating material”  means a good or material that 
does not qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;  “originating good” or “originating material”  means a good or material that qualifies 
as originating in accordance with this Chapter;   
 “packing materials and containers for shipment”  means goods used to protect 
another good during its transportation, but does not include the packaging materials 
or containers in which a good is packaged for retail sale;   “preferential tariff treatment” means the customs duty rate applicable to an originating good, pursuant to each Party’s Schedule to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments) ;  
 “producer”  means a person who engages in the production of a good; 
 “production” means operations including growing, cultivating, raising, mining, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting, capturing, collecting, breeding, extracting, aquaculture, gathering, manufacturing, processing, or assembling a good;  
 
 “production value” means the price paid or payable to the producer of the good at the place where the last production was carried out, and must include the value of all materials.  If there is no price paid or payable or if it does not include the value of all materials, the value of the good:   
  
(a)  must include the value of all materials and the cost of production employed in producing the good, calculated in accordance with accounting principles which are generally accepted in the Party of the producer; and   
  
(b)  may include amounts for general expenses and profit to the producer that can be reasonably allocated to the good.   
 
Any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the good obtained is exported are excluded.   If value of the good includes costs incurred subsequent to the good 
leavin g the place of production, such as freight, insurance, packing, and all other 
costs incurred to transport the good, those costs are to be excluded; and 
 
“value of the good”  means, in relation to a good, either:  
   
(a) the production value of the good; or 
 
(b)  the price actually paid or payable for the good when sold for export or other value determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement, excluding any costs incurred in the international shipment of the good.  
  
Article 4.2  
Origin Criteria  
 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter , a good shall be regarded as  
originating if it is : 
 
(a) wholly obtained or produced in the territory of one or both of the Parties, as established  in Article 4.3 (Wholly Obtained or Produced 
Goods);  
 
(b) produced entirely in the territory of one or both of the Parties, exclusively from originating materials; or  
 
(c) produced entirely in the territory of one or both of the Parties using non-originating materials, provided  the good satisfies all applicable 
requirements of Annex 4B (Product- Specific Rules),  
 
in each case, provided the good satisfies all other applicable requirements of this 
Chapter. 
  
Article 4.3 
Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods 
 
For the purposes of Article 4.2 (Origin Criteria) the following  goods shall 
be considered as  wholly obtained or produced in the territory of one or both of the 
Parties if they are:  
 
(a) a plant, plant good, or fungus, grown, cultivated, harvested, picked, or gathered there; 
 (b) a live animal born and raised there;  (c) a good obtained from a live animal there;  
 
(d) an animal obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering, or capturing there but not beyond the outer limits of a Party’s territorial sea;  
  (e) a good obtained from aquaculture there but not beyond the outer 
limits of a Party’s territorial sea;  
 (f) a mineral or other naturally occurring substance, not included in subparagraphs (a) through (e), extracted or taken from there; 
 (g) fish, shellfish, and other marine life taken from the sea, seabed, or subsoil beyond the outer limits of: 
 
(i) Australia’s territorial sea but within the territory of Australia by vessels that are registered, listed, or recorded in Australia; or   
(ii)  the United Kingdom’ s territorial sea but within the territory 
of the United Kingdom by vessels that are registered in the United Kingdom and entitled to fly the flag of the United Kingdom;  
(h)  fish, shellfish, and other marine life taken from the sea, seabed, or subsoil beyond the outer limits of the territories of each Party and, in accordance with international law, outside the territorial sea of non-parties by vessels that are registered, listed, or recorded with a 
Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;  
 
(i) a good produced from goods referred to in subparagraph (g) or 
subparagraph (h) on board a factory ship that is registered, listed, or recorded with a Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party; 
 
(j) a good other than fish, shellfish,  and other marine  life taken or 
extracted by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside the territories of the Parties, and beyond areas over which non-parties exercise jurisdiction provided that Party or person of 
that Party has the right to exploit that seabed or subsoil in 
accordance with international law;  
 (k) a good that is:  
(i) waste or scrap derived from production there; or  
 (ii) waste or scrap derived from used goods collected there, provided that those goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials; and  
 (l)  a good produced there, exclusively from goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (k), or from their derivatives.  
  Article 4.4 
Regional Value Content 
 
1. Where  a regional value content requirement is specified in this Chapter, including 
related Annexes, to determine whether a good is originating, the regional value 
content shall be calculated using one of the following methods:  
 
Build -Down Method: based on the value of non- originating materials  
 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =  𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣  𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑣𝑣 𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑔 − 𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣
𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛−𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑣𝑣𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑔𝑔 𝑚𝑚𝑣𝑣𝑡𝑡𝑣𝑣𝑜𝑜
𝑜𝑜𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑚𝑚
𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣  𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 
𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑣𝑣 𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑔×100 
 Build -Up Method: based on the value of originating materials 
 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =  𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣  𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑣𝑣𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑔𝑔 𝑚𝑚𝑣𝑣𝑡𝑡𝑣𝑣𝑜𝑜
𝑜𝑜𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑚𝑚
𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣  
𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑣𝑣 𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑔×100 
 
in each case where:  
 RVC is the regional value content of a good, expressed as a percentage;  
 value of non -originating materials is the value of non- originating materials, 
including materials of undetermined origin, used in the production of the good; and  
 value of originating materials is the value of originating materials used in the 
production of the good in the territory of one or both Parties.  
 2.  All costs considered for the calculation of regional value content shall be recorded and maintained in conformity with the generally a ccepted accounting principles 
applicable in the territory of a Party where the good is produced. 
  
Article 4.5 
Materials Used in Production  
 1.  If a non- originating material undergoes further production such that it satisfies the 
requirements of this Chapter, the material shall be treated as originating when determining the originating  status of the subsequently produced good, regardless 
of wh ether that material was produced by the producer of the good. 
 2.  If a non- originating material is used in the production of a good, the following may 
be counted as originating content in determining whether the resulting good meets a regional value content requirement:  
 
(a) the value of production of the non- originating material undertaken in the 
territory of one or both Parties by one or more producers; and  
 
(b) the value of any originating material used in the production of the non-  
  originating material undertaken in the territory of one or both Parties by one 
or more producers. 
  
Article 4.6  
Value of Materials Used in Production  
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the value of a material is:  
 
(a) for a material imported by the producer of the good, the price actually paid 
or payable for the material at the time of importation or other value 
determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement, including the costs incurred in the internatio nal shipment of the material; 
 
(b) for a material acquired in the territory where the good is produced:  
 
(i) the price paid or payable by the producer in the Party where the producer is located;  
 (ii) the value as determined for an imported material in sub paragraph 
(a); or  
 (iii) the earliest ascertainable price paid or payable in the territory of the Party; or  
 
(c) for a material that is self -produced: 
 
(i)  all the costs incurred in the production of the material, which includes general expenses; and  
 (ii) an amount equivalent to the profit added in the normal course of trade, or equal to the profit that is usually reflected in the sale of goods of the same class or kind as the self -produced material that is 
being valued. 
  
Article 4.7 
Further Adjustmen ts to the Value of Materials  
 1. For an originating material, the following expenses may be added to the value of the material, if not included under Article 4.6 (Value of Materials Used in 
Production):   (a) the costs of freight, insurance, packing, and all other costs incurred to transport the material to the location of the producer of the good;  
 
(b) duties, taxes, and customs brokerage fees on the material, paid in the territory of a Party, other than duties and taxes that are waived, refunded,  
  refunda ble, or otherwise recoverable, which include credit against duty or 
tax paid or payable; and  
 
(c) the cost of waste and spoilage resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less the value of reusable scrap or by-product.  
 2.  For a non- originating material or material of undetermined origin, the following 
expenses may be deducted from the value of the material:   
 (a) the costs of freight, insurance, packing, and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the location of the producer of the good;  
 
(b) duties, taxes, and customs brokerage fees on the material paid in the territory of one or both Parties, other than duties and taxes that are waived, refunded, refundable, or otherwise recoverable, which include credit against duty or tax paid or payable; and 
 
(c) the cost of waste and spoilage resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less the value of reusable scrap or by-product. 
 
3.  For greater certainty, when a non- originating material is used in the production of 
a good, the values referred to in subparagraph 2(a) and subparagraph 2(b) of Article 
4.5 (Materials Used in Production)  may be:  
 (a) deducted from the value of the non- originating material if calculating the 
regional value content requirement using the Build-Down Method; or  
 (b) included in the value of originating materials if calculating the regional value content requirement using t he Build -Up Method. 
 4.  For the purposes of this Article, if a cost, expense, or value is unknown or documentary evidence of the amount of the adjustment is not available, then no adjustment is allowed for that cost, expense, or value. 
  
Article 4.8  
Recovered Materials and Remanufactured Goods 
 1.  A recovered material derived in the territory of one or both of the Parties shall be treated as originating when it is used in the production of, and incorporated into, a remanufactured good.  
 2.  For greater certainty:  
 
(a) a remanufactured good shall be treated as originating only if it satisfies the applicable requirements of Article 4.2 (Origin Criteria); and  
  (b) a recovered material that is not used or incorporated in the production of a 
remanufactured good shall be treated as originating only if it satisfies the applicable requirements of Article 4.2 (Origin Criteria).  
  
Article 4.9  
Accumulation  
 
1.  A good shall be regarded as originating if the good is produced in the territory of one or both of the Parties by one or more producers, provided that the good satisfies the requirements of Article  4.2 (Origin Criteria) and all other applicable 
requirements in this Chapter. 
 2.  An o riginating good or material of one Party shall be considered originating in the 
territory of the other Party when used in the production of a good in the territory of the other Party. 
 3.  Production undertaken on a non -originating material in the territory of one or both 
Parties by one or more producers may contribute toward the originating content of a good for the purpose of determining its origin, regardless of whether that production was sufficient to confer originating status to the material itself.   
  
Article 4.10 
Tolerance  
 
1.  A good that contains non- originating materials that do not satisfy the applicable 
change in tariff classification requirement specified in Annex 4B (Product -Specific 
Rules) for the good shall nonetheless be regarded as originating if: 
 
(a) in the case of goods in Chapters 1 through 24 and 50 through 63 of the Harmonized System:  
 
(i) the total weight of those materials does not exceed 10 per cent of the weight of the good not including the weight of any packaging; or 
 (ii) the value of those materials does not exceed 10 per cent of the value of the good; or 
 
(b) in the case of goods in Chapters 25 through 49 and 64 through 97 of the Harmonized System, the value of those materials does not exceed 10 per cent of the value of the good, 
 
and the good meets all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.  
 
2.  If a good described in paragraph 1 is also subject to a regional value content 
requirement, the value of those non- originating materials shall be included in the  
  value of non- originating materials for any applicable regional value content 
requirement. 
 
 
Article 4.11 
Fungible Goods or Materials  
 
1.  A  fungible good or material shall be treated as originating based on the: 
  
(a) physical segregation of each fungible good or material; or  
 
(b) use of any inventory management method recognised in the generally accepted accounting p rinciples of the Party where the production is 
performed, if originating and non- originating fungible goods or materials 
are comingled, provided that the inventory management method selected is used throughout the fiscal year of the person that selected the inventory management method.   
2.  The inventory management system must ensure that no more goods or material receive originating status than would have been the case if the fungible goods or materials had been physically segregated.  
  
Article 4.12 
Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools, and Instructional or Other Information 
Materials  
 1.  For the purpose of determining origin of a good, accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information materials classified and delivered with, but not invoiced separately from a good shall be:  (a) disregarded in determining whether a good is wholly obtained or satisfies a process or c hange in tariff classification requirement set out in Annex 4B 
(Product-Specific Rules) for the good; and 
 
(b) taken into account as originating or non- originating materials, as the case 
may be, in calculating the regional value content of the good,  
 
provided the quantities, value, and type of accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information material are customary for the good.  
2.  Accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information materials, described in paragraph 1 shall be deemed to have the same originating status as the good with which they are delivered.  
  Article 4.13 
Packaging Materials and Containers for Retail Sale  
 
Packaging materials and containers in which a good is packaged for retail 
sale shall, if classified with the good, be:  
 
(a) disregarded in determining whether the non- originating materials used in 
the production of the good have satisfied the applicable process or change 
in tariff classification requirement set out in Annex 4B (Product- Specific 
Rules), or whether the good is wholly obtained or produced; and 
 (b) taken into account as originating or non- originating materials, as the case 
may be, in calculating the regional value content of the good. 
  
Article 4.14 
Packing Materials and Containers for Shipment  
 
 Packing materials and containers for shipment shall be disregarded in 
determining whether a good is originating.  
  
Article 4.15 
Indirect Materials  
 
An indirect material shall be considered to be  originating without regard to 
where it is produced. 
  
Article 4.16 
Sets of Goods  
 1.  For a set classified as a result of the application of rule 3(a) or rule 3(b) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the originating status of the set shall be determined in accordance with the product -specific rule of 
origin that applies to the set.  
 2.  For a set classified as a result of the application of rule 3(c) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the set shall be originating only if each good in the set is originating and both the set and the goods meet the other applicable requirements of this Chapter. 
 3.  Notwithstanding paragraph 2, for a set classified as a result of the application of rule 3(c) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the 
set is originating if the value of all the non- originating goods in the set does not 
exceed 20 per cent of the value of the set.  
  4.  For the purposes of paragraph 3, the value of the non- originating goods in the set 
and the value of the set shall be calculated in the same manner as the value of non -
originating materials and the value of the good. 
 
  
Article 4.17  
Non-Alteration   
 
1.  An originating good shall retain its originating status if the good has been 
transported to the importing Party without passing through the territory of a non-party.   
2.  A n originating good transported through the territory of one or more non- parties 
shall  retain its originating status provided that the good : 
 
(a)  does not undergo further production or any other operation outside the territories of the Parties, other than unloading, reloading, separation from 
a bulk shipment or splitting of a consignment, storing, repacking, labelling or marking required by the importing Party or  any other operation 
necessary to preserve it in good condition or to transport the good to the territory of the importing Party.  
 (b)     is not released to free circulation in the territory of any non-party .
1  
  
Section B  
Origin Procedures 
  
Article 4.18 
Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment  
 
1.  Each Party shall provide that an importer may make a claim for preferential tariff treatment, based on a declaration of origin completed by the exporter, producer , or, 
in the case of an exporter or producer in Australia, an authorised representative of the exporter or producer,  or the importer’s knowledge that a good is originating.  
 2.  Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin:  
 
(a) need not follow a prescribed format; 
  
(b) be in writing, including electronic format; 
 
                                                            
1The Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation shall report to the Joint 
Committee on the operation of subparagraph (b) within one year of the date of entry into force of this 
Agreement.  
  (c) specifies that the good is both originating and meets the requirements of 
this Chapter;  
 
(d) be attached to, or provided on, an invoice or any other commercial document  that describes the goods concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified; and  
 
(e) fulfils the data requirements as set out in Annex 4A (Data Requirements).  
 3.  Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin may apply to:  
 
(a) a single shipment of a good into the territory of a Party; or 
 
(b) multiple shipments of identical goods within any period specified in the declaration of origin, but not exceeding 12 months. 
 4.  Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin is valid for one year after the date that it was completed or for such longer period specified by the laws and regulations of the importing Party. 
 5.  If unassembled or disassembled products within the meaning of rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System falling within Sections XV to XXI of the Harmonized System are imported by more than one shipment, a single declaration of origin for such products may be used on request of the importer and in accordance with the requirements laid down by the customs authority of the importing Party. 
  
Article 4.19  
Basis of a Declaration of Origin or Importer’s Knowledge  
 1.  Each Party shall provide that if a producer declares the origin of a good, the declaration of origin is completed on the basis of the producer having information that the good is originating. 
 2.  Each Party shall provide that if the exporter is not the producer of the good, a declaration of origin may be completed by the exporter of the good on the basis of:  
 
(a) the exporter having information that the good is originating; or 
 
(b) reasonable reliance on the producer’s information that the good is originating.  
 
3.  Each Party shall provide that if an importer of the good makes a claim for preferential tariff treatment on the basis of the importer’s knowledge the good is originating,  the claim is made on the basis of:  
 
(a) the importer having documentation that the good is originating; or  
   
(b) reasonable reliance on supporting documentation provided by the exporter 
or producer that the good is originating. 
 4.  Australia shall also provide that a declaration of origin may be completed by an authorised representative of an exporter or producer of the good, on the basis of reasonable reliance on supporting documentation provided by the exporter or producer that the  good is originating.  
 5.  For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 shall be construed to allow a Party to require an exporter or producer to complete a declaration of origin or provide a declaration of origin to another person. 
  
Article 4.20  
Discrepancies 
 
A Party shall not reject a declaration of origin due to minor errors or 
discrepancies, such as slight discrepancies between documents, omissions of information or typing errors, provided these minor discrepancies or errors do not create doubt as to the originating status of the good. 
 
 
Article 4.21 
Waiver of Declaration of Origin  
 
A Party shall not require a declaration of origin if: 
 
(a) the customs value of the importation does not exceed, in the case of Australia, 1,000 Australian Dollars or, in the case of the United Kingdom, 1,000 Pound Sterling, or any higher amount as the importing Party may establish; or  
 (b) it is a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement or does not require the importer to present a declaration of origin, 
 
provided that the importation does not form part of a series of importations, which the customs authority of the importing Party reasonably considers to have been carried out or planned for the purpose of evading compliance with the importing Party’s laws and regulations governing claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement.  
  
Article 4.22 
Obligations Relating to Importation  
 
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, each Party shall provide that, for the purpose of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the importer shall:  
   
(a)  declare that the good qualifies as an originating good;  
 
(b)  possess either:  
 
(i)  a valid declaration of origin; or 
 (ii)  documentation that formed the basis for the importer’s knowledge that the good is originating;  
 
(c)  provide to the importing Party a copy of any declaration of origin and other  evidence that the good qualifies as an originating good, if required by the importing Party; and  
 (d)  if required by an importing Party to demonstrate that the requirements in Article 4.17 (Non -Alteration ) have been satisfied, provide relevant 
documents, such as transport documents, and in the case of storage, storage documents. 
 
2.  Each Party shall provide that if the importer has reason to believe that the claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on incorrect information that could affect the accuracy or validity of the declaration of origin, the importer shall correct the importation document and pay any customs duty and, if applicable, penalties owed. 
 3.  Each Party may provide that if the exporter or producer has reason to believe that the declaration of origin is based on incorrect information that could affect the accuracy or validity of the declaration of origin, they shall be obliged to immediately notify the importer in writing of any change affecting the originating status of each good to which the declaration of origin applies.  
4.  Each Party shall encourage its customs authority, when considering imposing a penalty in relation to a claim for preferential tariff treatment, to consider as a significant mitigating factor a voluntary notification given prior to the discovery of that error by the Party and in accordance with paragraph 2 or paragraph 3, provided 
that in the case of a notification given by an importer, the importer corrects the 
error and repays any duties owing. 
  
Article 4.23  
Record Keeping Requirements  
 
1.  Each Party sh all provide that an importer claiming preferential tariff treatment for 
a good imported into the territory of that Party shall maintain, for a period of four years from the date of importation of the good, or such longer period as the importing Party speci fies: 
 
(a)  documentation related to the good’s importation, including any declaration of origin that served as the basis for the claim; and  
   
(b) all records necessary to demonstrate that the good is originating and 
qualified for preferential tariff treatment, if the claim was based on the importer’s knowledge that the good was originating.  
 
2.  Each Party shall provide that a producer or exporter in its territory that provides a declaration of origin shall maintain, for a period of four years from the date the declaration of origin was issued, or such longer period as the importing Party specifies, all records necessary to demonstrate that a good for which the exporter or producer provided a declaration of origin is originating.   
 3.  Each Party sha ll provide that an importer, exporter, or producer in its territory may 
choose to maintain the records specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 in any medium that allows for prompt retrieval, including electronic, optical, magnetic, or written form in accordance wi th that Party’s laws and regulations.  
  
Article 4.24  
Verification of Origin  
 Initiating a verification of origin  
 1.  For the purpose of determining whether a good imported into its territory is originating, the customs authority of the importing Party may conduct a verification of any claim for preferential tariff treatment by one or more of the following:  
 (a) a written request for information from the importer of the good; 
 
(b) a written request for information from the exporter or producer of the good, where the customs authority of the importing Party considers the information obtained under subparagraph (a) is not sufficient to make a determination and the customs authority of  the importing Party would like 
additional information; or  
 
(c) a written request for information from the customs authority of the exporting Party where the customs authority of the importing Party considers the information obtained under subparagraph (a)  and 
subparagraph (b) is not sufficient to make a determination and the customs authority of the importing Party would like additional information.  
 A verification under this paragraph may be conducted at the time the customs import declaration  is lodged, or before or after the release of the good by the 
customs authority of the importing Party. 
 2. If the customs authority of the importing Party decides to conduct a verification pursuant to paragraph 1, it shall accept information directly from the import er, 
exporter, or producer.  
  3.  Where a written request is made under subparagraph 1(b) the customs authority of 
the importing Party shall:  
 
(a)  ensure that the information requested is limited to information pertaining to 
the fulfilment of the requirements of this Chapter as follows:   
 
(i) if the claim was based on a declaration of origin, that declaration of origin; and  
 (ii) where the claim was based on the good having been wholly obtained or produced pursuant to subparagraph (a) of Article 4.2 (Origin Criteria), the applicable subparagraph in Article 4.3 (Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods), and the place of production; or 
 
(iii) where the clai m was based on the good having been produced 
entirely pursuant to subparagraph (b) of Article 4.2 (Origin Criteria), information on the origin of the materials, and the place of production; or 
 
(iv) where the claim was based on a change in tariff classification, a list of all the non- originating materials used in the production of the 
good in a Party, including their tariff classification (in two, four, or six-digit format, depending on the relevant product -specific rule of 
origin); or  
 
(v) where the claim  was based on the regional value content, the value 
of the final good, the value of all non- originating materials used in 
the production (where the build -down method is used) or the value 
of all originating materials used in the production (where the build -
up method is used), as well as information on how such values were determined; or  
 
(vi) where the claim was based on a production process, a specific description of that process; and   
 
(vii) information on any tolerances relied on under Article 3.9 (Tolerance); and  
 (viii)  information relating to compliance with the non- alteration 
provisions under Article 4.17 (Non -Alteration).  
 
(b) allow the exporter or producer at least 30 days from the date of receipt of the request to provide the requested information; and 
 
(c) notify the customs authority of the exporting Party of the request. 
 4. Where  a written request is made under subparagraph 1(c) the customs authority of 
the importing Party may request specific documentation and information from the  
  customs authority of the exporting Party as part of a verification of origin not later 
than two year s after the date on which a claim for preferential tariff treatment was 
made.  The customs authority of the exporting Party shall provide the customs authority of the importing Party with a written acknowledgement of receipt of this request within 45 days of  the date of the request, or any other time period as may 
be decided between the Parties.   
 Actions of the customs authority of the exporting Party  5. Following a request under subparagraph 1(c), the customs authority of the exporting Party may, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party:  
 
(a) request the records referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 4.23 (Record Keeping Requirements); 
 (b) ask questions of the exporter, a producer, or a supplier of the good to verify 
the origin of the goods; and 
 
(c) visit the premises of the exporter, a producer, or a supplier to review the records referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 4.23 (Record Keeping Requirements) or to observe the facilities used in the productio n of the 
good.  
 
6. As soon as possible, and in any event within 10 months after receiving the written request under paragraph 4, the customs authority of the exporting Party shall wherever possible provide the customs authority of the importing Party with  the 
following: 
 
(a)  t he documentation requested by the customs authority of the importing 
Party under paragraph 4 where available;  
 (b) the description of the good that is subject to examination, including its tariff classification in two, four, or six -digit format, depending on the origin 
criterion;  
 
(c) a description of the production process;  
 (d) information on the manner in which the  examination of the good pursuant 
to paragraph 5 was conducted; and 
 
(e) supporting documentation, where appropriate.  
 
Release of goods subject to verification  
 7. During verification, the importing Party shall allow the release of the good, subject to payment of any duties or provision of any security as provided for in its laws and regulations.  If as a result of the verification the importing Party determines that  the  
  good is an originating good, it shall grant preferential tariff treatment to the good 
and refund any excess duties paid or release any security provided, unless the security also covers other obligations.  
 Completing a verification of origin  8. The c ustoms authority of the importing Party shall:  
 
(a) make a determination  following a verification as expeditiously as possible 
and no later than 90 days after it receives the information necessary to make the determination, and no later than 365 days after the first request for information or other action under paragraph 1.  I f permitted by its laws and 
regulations, a Party may extend the 365- day period in exceptional cases, 
such as where the technical information concerned is very complex;  
 
(b) provide the importer with a written determination of whether the good is originating that includes the basis for the determination; and  
 
(c) provide the importer, exporter, or producer that provided information during the verification or certified that the good was originating with the results of the verification and the reasons for th at result.  
 Cooperation 
 
9. The customs authorities of the Parties shall discuss the overall operation and administration of the verification process, including forecasting of workload and discussing priorities.  If there is an unmanageable number of requests, the customs authorities of the Parties shall consult to establish priorities and consider steps to manage the workload, taking into consideration operational requirements.  
  
Article 4.25  
Determinations on Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatmen t 
 1. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 2, each Party shall grant a claim for preferential tariff treatment made in accordance with this Chapter for a good that arrives in its territory on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.  In addition, if permitted by the importing Party, the importing Party shall grant a claim for preferential tariff treatment made in accordance with this Chapter for a good which is imported into its territory or released from customs control on or after the  
date of entry into force of this Agreement.  
 2. The importing Party may deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment if:  
 
(a) it determines that the good does not satisfy any of the requirements of this Chapter;  
  (b) pursuant to a verification under Article 4.24 (Verification of Origin), it has 
not received sufficient information to determine that the good qualifies as 
originating, or that the importer, exporter, producer, or supplier has failed to comply with any requirements of this Chapter; 
 (c) the exporter, producer, or importer fails to respond to a written request for 
information in accordance with Article 4.24 (Verification of Origin); or  
 (d) the importer, exporter, or producer fails to comply with any of the relevant 
requirements for obtaining preferential tariff treatment.  
 3. If an importing Party denies a claim for preferential tariff treatment, it shall issue a determination to the importer that includes the reasons for the determination.  
 4. A Party shall not reject a claim for preferenti al tariff treatment for the sole reason 
that the invoice or other commercial document was issued in a non -party.  If an 
invoice is issued in a non- party, a Party shall require that the declaration of origin 
be separate from the invoice.  
  
Article 4.26 
Refu nds and Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment after Importation  
 
1.  Each Party shall provide that an importer may apply for preferential tariff treatment and a refund of any excess duties paid for a good if the importer did not make a claim for preferential tariff treatment at the time of importation, provided that the good would have qualified for preferential tariff treatment when it was imported into the territory of the Party.  
 2.  As a condition for preferential tariff treatment under paragraph 1, the importing Party may require that the importer:  
 
(a) make a claim for preferential tariff treatment;  
 (b) where applicable, provide a copy of any declaration of origin; and  (c) provide such other documentation relating to the importation of the good as the  importing Party may require, 
 
no later than two years after the date of importation or a longer period if specified in the importing Party’s laws and regulations.  
  Article 4.27 
Penalties  
 
A Party shall establish or maintain measures imposing criminal, civil, or 
administrative penalties for violations of its laws and regulations related to this 
Chapter. 
  
Article 4.28 
Confidentiality  
 
For greater certainty, Article 5.2 1 (Confidentiality - Customs Procedures 
and Trade Facilitation) applies to this Chapter.  
  
Section C  
Other Matters  
  
Article 4. 29  
Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation  
 
1.  The Parties hereby establish a Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation composed of government representatives of each Party responsible for rules of origin and customs and trade facilitation matters to consider any matters arisi ng under this Chapter or Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade 
Facilitation).  
 2.  The functions of the Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation shall include: 
 
(a) cooperating in the administration and uniform interpretation of this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation); 
 (b) monitoring the effective operation and implementation of this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation);  
 (c) providing a regular forum for information exchange on matters related to 
this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation);  
 (d) ensuring customs authority contact details have been exchanged;  (e) discussing the potential for applying cumulation with: 
 
(i) non- parties where each Party has a free trade agreement with the 
same non -party; and  
 (ii) least-developed countries;  
   
(f) considering amendments or modifications to this Chapter, Annex 4B 
(Product- Specific Rules) or Annex 4A (Data Requirements), that are  
necessary to reflect changes to the Harmonized System and taking into account developments in technology, production processes or other related matters;  
 (g) considering amendments or modifications to Article 4.17 (Non -
Alteration);  and 
 (h) considering any matters referred to it by the Committee on Trade in Goods 
or the Joint Committee.  
 
3.  The Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter 
as the Parties may decide.   
 
4.  The Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation shall report to the Committee on Trade in Goods.4A - 1 
 ANNEX 4A  
 
 
DATA REQUIREMENTS  
 
A declaration of origin that is the basis for a claim for preferential tariff 
treatment under this Agreement must include the following elements: 
 
1.  Exporter, Producer, or Authorised Representative of the Exporter or Producer   Indicate whether the signatory is the exporter, or producer in 
accordance with Article 4.18 (Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment).  In the 
case of an authorised representative, indicate whether the declaration of origin has been completed on behalf of the exporter, producer, or both.   
 
2.  Signatory  
 Provide the signatory’s name, company name (if applicable), address 
(including country), telephone number, and e- mail address.  
 
3.  Exporter  
 Provide the exporter’s name, address (including country), e -mail 
address, and telephone number if different from the signatory.  For UK exporters, provide the UK exporter reference number where one has been assigned.  The address of the exporter must be in  the exporting Party.  This 
information is not required if the producer is completing the declaration of origin and does not know the identity of the exporter.  
 
4.  Producer  
 Provide the producer’s name, address (including country), e -mail 
address, and telephone number, if different from the certifier or exporter or, if there are multiple producers, state “Various” or provide a list of producers.  A person that wishes for this information to remain confidential may state “Available upon request by the importing authorities”.  The address of a producer must  be the place of production of the good in a Party. 
 
5.  Importer  
 Provide, if known, the importer’s name, address, e -mail address, and 
telephone number.  The address of the importer must be in a Party. 
 
6.  Description and HS Tariff Classification of the Good  
 (a) Provide a description of the good and the Harmonized System tariff classification of the good to the six- digit level.  The4A - 2 
 description should be sufficient to relate it to the good covered 
by the declaration of origin; and  
 
(b) If the declaration of origin covers a single shipment of a good, indicate, if known, the invoice number related to the exportation. 
 7.  Origin Criterion  
 Specify the rule of origin under which the good qualifies.  
8.  Period for multiple shipments  
 
If the declaration of origin covers multiple shipments of identical goods 
for a specified period of up to 12 months as set out in paragraph 3 of Article 
4.18 (Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment), state the period during which 
such shipments will be made.  
 
9.  Authorised Signature and Date  
 If the exporter or producer is the s ignatory, the declaration of origin 
must be signed and dated by the signatory, and accompanied by the following statement:  
 
I (the exporter/the produ cer) declare that the goods described in 
this document qualify as originating and the information contained in this document is true and accurate.  I (the 
exporter/the producer) assume responsibility for proving such representations and agree to maintain and present upon request or to make available during a verification visit, documentation necessary to support this declaration of origin.  If an authorised representative of the exporter or producer is the 
signatory , the declaration of origin must be signed, dated and accompanied by 
the following statement: 
 I (the authorised representative of the exporter/producer)  
declare that the goods described in this document qualify as originating and the information contained in this document is true and accurate.  The exporter or the producer, as the case may be, assumes responsibility for providing such representations and agrees to maintain and present upon request or to make 
available during a verification visit, documentation necessary to support this declaration of origin.CHAPTER 5  
 
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION 
 
 
Article 5.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
   
“customs laws” means any laws and regulations applicable in the territory of 
each Party governing the import, export , and transit of goods, as well as other 
customs procedures, and including measures of prohibition, restriction, and control, administered, applied or enforced by the customs authorities of the Parties; a nd  
 “customs procedures” means the measures applied by the customs authority of each Party . 
  
Article 5.2 
Scope  
 1. This Chapter applies to customs procedures applied to goods traded between 
the Parties.  
 2. This Chapter shall be implemented by each Party in accordance with its laws and regulations.  
  
Article 5.3 
Customs Procedures and Facilitation of Trade  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures are applied in a manner that is predictable, consistent , transparent , and non- discriminatory . 
 2. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the Trade Facilitation Agreement.   
 3. Customs procedures of each Party shall conform, where possible, and to the extent permitted by its respective laws, regulations , and policies, to 
international standards and recommended practices established by the World Customs Organization ("WCO ") and under other relevant international 
agreements to which the Parties are party.  
 4. Each Party shall periodically review its customs procedures with a view to exploring options for their simplification and the enhancement of mutually beneficial arrangements to facilitate trade between the Parties.  
  
5. The Parties shall seek to reinforce their cooperation to promote trade facilitation while ensuring effective customs control.  
  
Article 5.4 
Data, Documentation and Automation 
  1. With a view to simplifying and minimising the complexity of import, export , 
and transit formalities and documentation requirements, each Party shall ensure as appropriate, that such formalities, data, and documentation 
requirements:   
  
(a) are adopted or applied with a view to a rapid release of goods, to  facilitate trade between  the Parties; and   
 
(b) are adopted or applied in a manner that aims to reduce the time and cost of compliance for traders and operators.    
  2. Each Party shall :  
 
(a) make  electronic systems accessible to customs users;   
 
(b) allow  a customs declaration to be submitted in electronic  format;   
 
(c) employ electronic or automated systems for risk analysis and targeting; and 
 
(d) endeavour to implement common standards and elements for import and export data by giving consideration to the WCO Data Model;  
   3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the development of interoperable electronic systems,  to facilitate trade between the Parties.   
  
Article 5.5 
Transparency and Publication 
 1. Further to Article 28.2 (Publication  – Transparency and Anti-Corruption) , 
each Party shall promptly publish, including online: 
 
(a) importation, exportation , and transit procedures (including port, 
airport, and other entry point procedures) and required forms and documents; 
 
(b) applied rates of duties and taxes of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation;  
 (c) fees and charges imposed by or for governmental agencies on or in 
connection with importation, exportation or transit; 
 
(d) rules for the classi fication or valuation of products for customs 
purposes; 
 
(e) laws, regulations , and administrative rulings of general application 
relating to rules of origin; 
 
(f) import, export or transit restrictions or prohibitions;  
 
(g) penalty provisions against breaches of import, export or transit formalities;  
 
(h) procedures for appeal or review; 
 
(i) agreements or parts thereof with any country or countries relating to importation, exportation or transit;  
 
(j) procedures relating to the administration of tariff quotas; 
 
(k) hours of operation services provided by customs offices at ports and 
border crossing points; and 
 
(l) points of contact for information enquiries. 
 2. Each Party shall establish or maintain one or more enquiry points to address enquiries of interested parties or persons concerning customs and other trade facilitation issues and shall make information concerning the procedures for making those enquiries publicly available online.  The enquiry points shall 
answer enquiries and provide the forms and documents within a reasonable time period set by each Party, which may vary depending on the nature or complexity of the request. 
  
Article 5.6 
Simplified Customs Procedures  
    Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures allowing traders or 
operators fulfilling criteria specified in its laws and regulations to benefit from further simplification of customs procedures.  Those measures may b e 
offered through a Party’s Authorised Economic Operator program, or otherwise made available to traders or operators in accordance with its laws 
and regulations and may include:  
 
(a) customs declarations containing a reduced set of data or supporting documents, including for the movement of  low- value  consignments;  
 (b) deferred payment of customs duties and taxes until after the release 
of those imported goods; and  
 
(c) other matters as the Party  may decide.  
  
Article 5.7 
Expedited Shipments  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for 
expedited shipments ,
1 while maintaining appropriate customs control and 
selection.   These procedures shall:   
 
(a) provide for the submission and processing of information in advance of the ar rival
2 of a shipment to expedite its release;  
 
(b) to the extent possible, allow for a single submission of information covering all goods contained in a shipment through, if possible, electronic means;  
 
(c) to the extent possible, provide for the release of expedited shipments with a minimum of documentation or a reduced set of data;  
 
(d) provide, in normal circumstances, for an expedited shipment to be released within six hours of arrival, provided:  
 
(i) all information and documentation necessary to release the 
goods have been submitted on or prior to arrival;  
 
(ii) the goods are not  subject to physical examination or 
inspection; and  
 
(iii) the goods are otherwise admissible under the importing Party’s  laws and regulations;  
 
(e) apply to shipments of any weight or value recognising that a Party may require additional entry procedures as a condition for release, including declarations and supporting documentation and payment of customs duties, and may limit such treatment based on the type of good; and   
 
                                                            
1 Expedited shipments may include goods imported through air cargo, or goods imported by traders 
fulfilling other criteria specified in the importing Party’s laws and regulations.  
2 For the purposes of this Article and in relation to shipments into the UK,  “arrival” for the UK means 
arrival at the point where the goods are presented to customs.  
 (f) provide that under normal circumstances  no customs duties will be 
assessed on expedited shipments valued at or below a fixed amount 
set under a Party’s law.     
 2. If a Party does not provide the t reatment in subparagraphs 1(a) through 1(f) 
to all shipments, that Party shall provide a separate
3 and expedited customs 
procedure that provides that treatment for expedited shipments. 
  
Article 5.8 
Release of Goods  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods  in order to  facilitate trade between the Parties in a 
manner that aims to reduce the cost for traders.  This paragraph shall not 
require a Party to release a good if its requirements for rele ase have not been 
met.    
 2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:    
(a) provide, in normal circumstances, for goods  to be released within 48 
hours of arrival,
4 provided: 
 
(i) all information  and documentation necessary to release the 
goods have been submitted on or prior to arrival;  
 
(ii) the goods are not subject to physical examination or inspection; and 
 
(iii) the goods are otherwise admissible under the importing Party’s laws and regulati ons; 
 
(b) i f applicable and to the extent possible, provide for the electronic 
submission and processing of customs information relating to import in advance of the arrival of the goods to expedite the release of goods from customs control upon arrival;  
 
(c) allow goods to be released without temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities;   
 
(d) allow for  the release of goods prior to the final determination of 
customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges not determined prior to or promptly upon arrival, provided that the good is otherwise eligible for release and any security required by the importing Party has been provided.  Before releasing the goods, a Party may require that an 
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, “separate” does not mean a specific facility or lane.  
4 For the purposes of this Article and in relation to shipments into the UK “arrival” for the UK means 
arrival at the point where the goods are presented to customs.  
 importer provides sufficient guarantee in the form of a surety, a 
deposit, or some other appropriate  instrument; and  
  
(e) to the extent possible and if applicable, provide for, in accordance with its laws and regulations, clearance of certain goods with a minimum of documentation.  
   3. If a Party allows for the release of go ods conditioned on a security, it shall 
adopt or maintain procedures that:   
   
(a) ensure that the amount of the security is no greater than that required 
to ensure that obligations arising from the importation of the goods will be  fulfilled;     
   
(b) ensure that the security shall be discharged as soon as possible after its customs authority is satisfied that the obligations arising from the 
importation of the goods have been fulfilled; and    
 
(c) allow importers to provide security using a form other than cash, 
including, in appropriate cases where an importer frequently enters goods, instruments covering multiple entries.   
   
Article 5.9 
Risk Management  
  1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management system  for customs 
control that enables its customs authority to focus its inspection activities on 
high-risk consignments and expedite the release of low-risk consignments.  
 2. Each Party shall design and apply risk management in a manner as to avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or disguised restrictions to international trade.   
 3. Each Party shall base risk management on assessment of risk through appropriate selectivity criteria.   
 4. Each Party may also select, on a random basis, consignments for inspection activities referred  to in paragraph 1 as part of its risk management.  
 5. In order to  facilitate trade, each Party shall periodically review and update, 
as appropriate, the risk management system specified in paragraph 1.  
   
Article 5.10 
Advance Rulings  
 1. Each Party shall issue, prior to the importation of a good of the other Party 
into its territory, a written advance ruling at the written request of an importer in its territory, or an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party
5, each an "app licant" , with regard to:     
   
(a) tariff classification;     
  (b) whether a good is originating in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures); and    
  (c) other matters as the Part y may decide.   
   2. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling as expeditiously as possible and in no case later than 90 days after it receives a request, provided that the applicant has submitted all the information that the receiving Party requires 
to make the advance ruling.  This includes a sample of the good for which the 
applicant  is seeking an advance ruling if requested by the receiving Party.  In 
issuing an advance ruling, the Party shall take into account the facts and circumstances that the applicant  has provided.  For greater certainty, a Party 
may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and circumstances forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of administrative or judicial review or where the application is not based on factual information, or  does 
not relate to an intention to import or export .  A Party that declines to issue 
an advance ruling shall promptly notify the applicant  in writing, setting out 
the relevant facts and circumstances and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the advance ruling.   
 3. Each Party shall provide that its advance rulings shall take effect on the date that they are issued or on another date specified in the ruling, and remain in effect for at least three years, provided that the law,  facts and circumstances 
on which the ruling is based remain unchanged.   
   4. After issuing an advance ruling, the Party may modify or revoke the advance ruling if there is a change in the law, facts or circumstances on which the ruling was based, if the ruling was based on inaccurate or false information, 
if the ruling was in error, if conflicting advance rulings have been issued for goods of the same class or kind, if the advance ruling has been reviewed 
internally, or if the importing customs authority  changes its interpretation of 
the law.    
   5. Where  a Party revokes or modifies an advance ruling, it shall provide written 
notice to the applicant setting out the relevant facts and the basis for its decision.  
  6. Neither Party shall apply a revocati on or modification retroactively to the 
detriment of the applicant unless the ruling was based on incomplete, 
                                                            
5 For greater certainty, an importer, exporter or producer may submit a request for an advance ruling 
through a duly authorised representative.  
 incorrect, inaccurate, false , or misleading information provided by the 
applicant .   
 
7. Subject to any confidentiality requirements in its laws and regulations, a Party may publish its advance rulings including online.   
  8. Each Party shall publish online, at least:   
   
(a) the requirements for the application for an advance ruling, including the information to be provided and the  format;    
 
(b) the time period  by which it will issue an advance ruling; and   
 
(c) the length of time for which the advance ruling is valid.  
   9. An advance ruling issued by a Party shall be binding on that Party in respect of the applicant that sought it and on the applicant.   
   10. Each Party shall provide, upon written request of an applicant, a review of the advance ruling or of the decision to revoke or modify it.    
  
Article 5.11 
Customs valuation  
  
 For the purpose of  determining the customs value of goods traded 
between the Parties, the provisions of Part I of the Customs Valuation 
Agreement  shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
  
Article 5.12 
Review and Appeal  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that any person to whom it issues a decision on a 
customs matter has access to:  
 
(a)  an administrative appeal to or review by an administrative authority higher than or independent of the official  or office that issued the 
decision; and 
 
(b)  a judicial  appeal or review of the decision.  
 
2. Each Party shall ensure that, in a case where the decision on appeal or review under subparagraph 1 (a) is not given within the period of time provided for in its laws and regulations or without undue delay, the pe rson has the right to 
further administrative or judicial appeal or review or any other recourse to the judicial authority in accordance with that Party’s laws and regulations.  
  
3. Each Party shall provide a person to whom it issues an administrative decision on the basis of a review or appeal referred to in paragraph 1 with the reasons for the administrative decision, so as to enable such a person to have recourse to appeal procedures where necessary.  
  
Article 5.13 
Penalties  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that allow for the imposition of a penalty by a Party’s customs authority for a breach of its customs laws . 
 2. E ach Party shall ensure that any penalties imposed for breaches of customs 
laws are proportionate and non-discriminatory.  Any penalty imposed shall 
depend on the facts and circumstances of the case and shall be commensurate with the degree and severity of the breach.  
 3. Each Party shall ensure that a penalty imposed by its customs authority for a 
breach of its customs laws  is imposed only on the person legally responsible 
for the breach. 
 4. Each Party is encouraged to require its customs authority, when imposing a penalty for a breach of its customs laws, to consider as a potential mitigating 
factor the voluntary disclosure of the breach prior to its discovery by the customs authority. 
 5. Each Party shall ensure that if a penalty is imposed for a breach of customs laws, an explanation in writing is provided to the person upon whom the 
penalty is imposed, specifying the nature of the breach and the applicable laws under which the amount or range of penalty for the breach has been 
prescribed.  
 6. Each Party shall provide in its laws, regulations  or procedures, or otherwise 
give effect to, a fixed and finite period within which its customs authority may initiate proceedings to impose a penalty relating to a breach of its  
customs laws. 
  
Article 5.14 
Customs Cooperation 
  1. The Parties shall, within the competence and available resources of their respective customs authorit ies, enhance cooperation, including the exchange 
of information on the matters referred to in this Chapter , with a view to 
further developing trade facilit ation , while ensuring compliance with their 
respective customs laws,  regulations, and procedural requirements, and 
improving supply chain security, in the following areas:  
  
(a) cooperation on harmonisation of data requirements for customs 
purposes, in line with applicable international standards such as the WCO  standards;  
  (b) cooperation on further development of the customs -related aspects of 
securing and facilitating the international trade supply chain in accordance with the SAFE Framework  of Standards to Secure and 
Facilitate Global Trade , adopted by the WCO Council in June 2005;  
 
(c) cooperation on improvement of their risk management techniques, including sharing best practices and, if appropriate, risk information and control results; and 
 (d) cooperation in international organisations on matters of common interest, including tariff classification, customs valuation and origin.  
  
Article 5.15 
Single Window  
    Each Party shall endeavour to develop or maintain single window 
systems to facilitate a single, electronic submission of all information required by customs and other legislation for the exportation, importation  and transit of goods.  
  
Article 5.16 
Transit and Transhipment  
  Each Party shall:    
 
(a) ensure the facilitation and effective control of transhipment operations and transit movements through their  
respective territories;  
 
(b) ensure that its authorities and agencies responsible for border controls and procedures dealing with the transit and transhipment of goods 
cooperate and coordinate their activities in order to facilitate trade ; 
and   
 
(c) allow goods intended for import to be moved under customs control within its territory from a customs office of entry to another customs office in its  territory from where the goods would be released or 
cleared.  
 Article 5.17 
Post-clearance Audit  
  
1. With a view to expediting the release of goods, each Party shall:    
(a) adopt or maintain post -clearance audit processes to ensure 
compliance with customs and other related laws and  regulations;  
 
(b) conduct post -clearance audits in a risk -based manner, which may 
include appropriate selectivity  criteria;  
 
(c) conduct post -clearance audits in a transparent manner.  Where an 
audit is conducted and conclusive results have been achieved the Party shall, without delay, notify the person whose record is audited of the results, the reasons for the results and the audited person's rights and obligations; and  
  
(d) wherever practicable, use the result of po st-clearance audit in 
applying risk management.   
  
Article 5.18 
Customs Brokers  
  The Parties shall :   
  
(a) not require the mandatory use of customs brokers;  
 
(b) publish measures on the use of customs brokers; and   
 
(c) apply transparent  and objective rules if and when licensing customs 
brokers. 
  
Article 5.19 
Temporary Admission of Goods 
 1. Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations, goods to be brought into its territory, conditionally relieved, totally or partially, from 
payment of import duties and taxes, if such goods are brought into its customs territory for a specific purpose , have not undergone any change except 
normal depreciation and wastage due to the use made of them , and are 
intended for re -exportation within a specific period.  
 2. Each Party shall continue to facilitate procedures for the temporary admission of goods traded between the Parties in accordance with its laws and 
regulations, and international obligations, with regard to :  
 (a) goods intended for display or demonstration at exhibitions, fairs, 
meetings, demonstrations or similar events, and goods intended for 
use in connection with the display of foreign products at those events;  
 
(b) professional equipment; 
 
(c) commercial samples, advertising , films and recordings; 
 
(d) containers, packing materials and pallets that are in use or to be used in the shipment of goods in international traffic; 
 
(e) goods imported for sports purposes ; and 
 
(f) any other goods as the Party may decide.  
  
Article 5.20 
Perishable Goods   
  1. For the purposes of this Article, perishable goods are goods that rapidly decay due to their natural characteristics, in particular in the absence of appropriate storage conditions.   
 2. With a view to preventing avoidable loss or deterioration of perishable goods, and provided that all regulatory requirements have been met, each Party shall : 
 
(a) provide in normal circumstances, for perishable goods to be released within 6 hours of arrival
6 provided:  
 
(i) all information and documentation necessary to release the goods have been submitted on or prior to arrival; 
 
(ii) the goods are not subject to physical examination or  
inspection;  
 
(iii) the goods are otherwise admissible under the importing Party’s  laws and regulations; and 
 
(b) in exceptional circumstances where it would be appropriate to do so, provide for the release of perishable goods  outside the business hours 
of customs and other relevant authorities.   
 3. Each Party shall give appropriate priority to perishable goods when scheduling any physical examinations or inspections that may be required.   
   
                                                            
6 For the purposes of this Article and in relation to shipments into the UK, “arrival” means at the point 
where the goods are presented to customs.  
 4. Each Party shall either arrange or allow an importer to arrange for the proper 
storage of perishable goods pending their release.  Each Part y may require 
that any storage facilities arranged by the importer have been approved or designated by its relevant authorities.   The movement of the goods to those 
storage facilities, including authorisations for the operator moving the goods, 
may be subject to the approval, where required, of the relevant authorities.  
Each Party shall, where practicable and consistent with domestic legislation, upon the request of the importer, provide for any procedures nece ssary for 
release to take place at those storage facilities.    
   
Article 5.21 
Confidentiality  
 1. Further to Article 31.6 (Confidential ity of Information – General Provisions 
and Exceptions), each Party shall maintain the confidentiality of the information collected  pursuant to this Chapter or Chapter 4 ( Rules of Origin  
and Origin Procedures ) and shall protect that information from disclosure that 
could prejudice the competitive position of the person to whom the confidential information relates.  
 2. Confidential information collected pursuant to this Chapter  or Chapter 4 
(Rules of Origin  and Origin Procedures ) shall only be used or disclosed for 
the purpose of administration and enforcement of customs matters, including determination of origin, or as otherwise provided under the Party’s law s and 
regulations, except with the permission of the Pa rty who provided the 
confidential information. Where permission has been granted by a Party, that 
use shall then be subject to any restrictions laid down by that Party.  
 3. If the Party receiving or obtaining the information is authorised or required by its laws and regulations  to disclose the information, that Party shall,  where 
possible, notify the Party who provided that information, wherever possible 
in advance of that disclosure. 
 4. Paragraph 2 shall not preclude the use of information collected as part of its customs processes as evidence in proceedings or charges subsequently instituted before the courts or tribunals for failure to comply with customs law.  Where the information is received from the other Party, the Party shall , 
where possible,  notify the Party who provided the information in advance of 
such use.  
  
Article 5.22 
Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation  
   The Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade 
Facilitation established pursuant to Article 4.29 (Working Group on Rules of  
 Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation – Rules of Origin) shall consider 
any matters arising under this Chapter.6 - 1 
 CHAPTER 6 
 
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES  
 
 
Article 6.1 
Definitions  
 
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:  
 “relevant international organisations” means organisations referred to in 
Annex A, paragraph 3 of the SPS Agreement;   “SPS measure” means a “sanitary or phytosanitary measure” as defined in Article 1.4 (General Definitions – Initial Provisions and General Definitions); 
and  “the SPS Committee” means the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.  
 
2. The definitions set out in Annex A to  the SPS Agreement shall apply.  
 
3. The Parties shall take into consideration the glossaries and definitions of the relevant international organisations, such as the Codex Alimentarius Commission ("Codex"), the World Organisation for Animal Health ("OIE") and the International Plant Protection Convention ("IPPC").  In the event of 
an inconsistency between these glossaries and definitions and the definitions 
set out in the SPS Agreement, the definitions set out in the SPS Agreement shall prevail.  
 
 
Article 6.2 
Objectives  
 
The objectives of this Chapter are to:  
 
(a) protect human, animal and plant life and health in the territory  of the 
Parties while facilitating trade between them;  
(b) ensure that the Parties’ SPS measures do not create unjustified barriers to trade;  
 
(c) reinforce and build upon the implementation of the SPS Agreement; 
 
(d) promote greater transparency and understanding on the application of each Party’s SPS measures;6 - 2 
 (e) strengthen communication and cooperation on relevant SPS issues; 
and   
(f) promote resolution of SPS issues that may affect trade between the Parties.  
  
Article 6.3 
Scope  
   This Chapter applies to all SPS measures of a Party that may, directly 
or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.  
  
Article 6.4  
Affirmation of the SPS Agreement  
 
1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other under the SPS Agreement.   
2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of each Party under the SPS Agreement.   
Article 6.5 
Science and Risk Assessment  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring that their respective SPS measures are based on scientific principles.  
 
2. The Parties shall ensure that their SPS measures are based on risk assessment in accordance with Article 5 and other relevant provis ions of the SPS 
Agreement, and taking into account risk assessment techniques developed by the relevant international organisations.  
  
Article 6.6 
Adaption to Regional Conditions 
 
1. The Parties acknowledge that adaptation of SPS measures to recognise 
regional conditions, including through application of concepts such as pest 
or disease  free areas, areas of low pest or disease prevalence, zoning, 
compartmentalisation, pest  free places of production, and pest  free 
production sites, is an important means of facilitating trade.  
 
2. Each Party shall apply the concepts set out in paragraph 1 in accordance with 
the SPS Agreement and take into account relevant international standards,6 - 3 
 guidelines and recommendations, and relevant guidance of the WTO SPS 
Committee.  
 
3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the recognition of regional 
conditions with the objective of acquiring confidence in the procedures 
followed by each Party for the recognition of regional conditions. 
 
4. When undertaking a risk assessment that will establish or maintain an SPS 
measure applicable to the exporting Party, the importing Party shall take into consideration a regionalisation determination of the exporting Party where this information is provided to them, including:  
 
(a) for sanitary measures applicable to the exporting Party, considering where zones proposed by the exporting Party have the status of disease -free officially recognised by the OIE or when the status has 
been recovered after an outb reak;  
 
(b) for phytosanitary measures applicable to the exporting Party, taking into account, inter alia , the pest status of an area, pest  free areas, pest  
free places of production, pest  free production site s, or area s of low 
pest prevalence that the exporting Party has established.  
 
5. When  making an assessment, the importing Party shall base its own 
determination of the animal and plant health status of the exporting Party or 
parts thereof, on the information provided by the exporting Party in 
accordance with the SPS Agreement and international standards, guidelines 
and recommendations, and any other information it considers appropriate.  
 
6. Where the importing Party determines that the information provided by the 
exporting Party with its request is sufficient it shall initiate an assessment  
and make a decision  within a reasonable period of time as to whether it can 
accept the exporting Party’s determination of regional conditions.  
 
7. Where the importing Party has accepted the exporting Party’s determination of regional conditions the exporting Party shall notify the importing Party of any modification to those regional conditions.  Following any such 
notification the importing Party may continue to accept the exporting country’s determination of regional conditions and allow trade to continue, provided that the importing Party is satisfied that its appropriate level of protection wi ll be maintained.   The importing Party may apply any other 
measure or measures, in accordance with the SPS Agreement, to meet its 
appropriate level of protection. 
 
8. If the importing Party adopts a measure that recognises specific regional conditions of an exporting Party, the importing Party shall implement the measure within a reasonable period of time and inform the exporting party 
when trade can commence without undue delay.6 - 4 
 9. If the evaluation of the evidence provided by the exporting Party does not  
result in a decision to recognise the regional conditions of the exporting 
Party, the importing Party shall provide the exporting Party with the rationale for its determination within a reasonable period of time.  
 10. If there is an incident that results in the importing Party modifying or revoking a decision recognising the regional conditions of the exporting Party, the Parties shall cooperate to assess whether the determination can be reinstated.  
  
Article 6.7 
Equivalence  
 
1. The Parties acknowledge that recognition of the equivalence of SPS measures is an important means of facilitating trade.  In determining equivalence of an 
individual measure, group of measures, or measures on a systems -wide basis, 
each Party shall consider  the relevant international standards, guidelines and 
recommendations.  
 
2. The importing Party shall recognise the equivalence of SPS measures, even if the measures differ from its own, if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates to the importing Party that the exporting Party’s measures 
achieve the importing Party’s appropriate level of protection.  The final 
determination of equivalence rests with the importing Party.  
 3. In order to strengthen cooperation on equivalence the Parties may, pursuant to paragraph 3(a) of Article 6.16 (Committee on SPS Measures), consider 
establishing a procedure for recognition of equivalence based on relevant international standards, guideline s and recommendations , and guidance of 
the WTO SPS Committee.   Such a procedure may include, inter alia,  the 
consultation process, information requirements, appropriate timeframes, and the respective responsibilities of the importing and exporting parties.  The 
Parties shall determine the most appropriate form of any such procedure.   
Article 6.8 
Trade C onditions  
 1. The importing Party shall make publicly available its general SPS import requirements and, upon request, make available to the exporting Party all SPS  
import requirements relating to the import of specific goods unless such 
information is publicly available.  
 
2. For the purpose of establishing specific SPS import conditions, the exporting Party shall, at the request of the importing Party , provide all relevant 
information required by the importing Party6 - 5 
 3. Each Party shall ensure that all SPS control, inspection, assessment , and 
approval procedures are undertaken and completed without undue delay 
including, if needed, audits , and the necessary legislative or administrative 
measures to complete the approval procedure .  Each Party shall , in particular , 
avoid unnecessary or unduly burdensome information requests, and take into 
account information already available in the importing Party, such as on the legislative framework and audit reports of the exporting Party 
 4. Subject to its laws and regulations, when a risk assessment is required in the process of determining import conditions, a Party shall, upon request, provide the other Party with the outcomes of that risk assessment within a reasonable period of time of the risk assessment being finalised.  
 5. The importing Party shall approve an establishment or facility situated in the territory  of the exporting Party without prior inspectio n where it has 
determined that the establishment or facility meets its relevant SPS requirements.  
  
Article 6.9 
Audit and V erification  
 
1. For the purpose of attaining and maintaining confidence in an exporting Party’s ability to provide required assurances and to comply with the SPS import requirements and related control measures of the importing Party, the importing Party shall have the right to carry out an audit or verification
1 of 
all or part of the control system of the competent authority of the exporting Party.  
 2. If possible, an audit or verification shall be systems- based and designed to 
check the effectiveness of the regulatory controls of the competent authorities of the exporting Party.  
 
3. In undertaking an audit or verification  a Party shall take into account relevant 
guidance of the WTO  SPS Committee and  relevant international standards, 
guidelines and recommendations.   
 4. The Parties shall endeavour to agree the conditions under which an audit or verification is to be carried ou t in advance.  Prior to the commencement of an  
audit or verification, the importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of its intention, and state the basis for undertaking the audit or verification, which may include:  (a) the reason it is required;  
 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, an audit or verification may include desk assessments and virtual, remote , or 
physical audits.6 - 6 
 (b) the objectives and scope of the assessment;  
 
(c) the criteria or requirements against which the exporting Party will be assessed; and  
 
(d) the procedures for conducting the assessment, including the method or methods of verification. 
 5. The Parties sh all endeavour to limit the frequency and number of audit visits.  
In case of a subsequent audit related to the same good, the importing Party shall carry out an audit only in duly justified circumstances and provide the exporting Party with an explanation as to the reason for the audit.  
 6. The importing Party may appoint a governmental body, non-governmental body, or a person with the necessary relevant expertise to carry out all or part 
of an audit or verification on its behalf. 
 7. The importing Party shall provide the exporting Party with a draft audit or 
verification report, including its findings, conclusions and recommendations , 
and shall provide the exporting Party with the opportunity to comment on the draft report.  The importing Party shall consider any comments that have been 
provided within a reasonable period of time, before finalising its assessment . 
 8. The importing Party shall provide the exporting Party with a final report setting out its conclusions in writing within a reasonable period of time.  If 
necessary to meet its appropriate level of protection , the importing Party may 
implement SPS measures prior to the completion of the audit or verification provided that such measures are not inconsistent with the SPS Agreement or this Agreemen t.  
 9. The costs incurred by the importing Party to conduct an audit or verification 
shall be borne by the importing Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise. 
 10. Measures taken by the importing Party as a consequence of  its audit or 
verification shall be supported by objective evidence, take into account the importing Party’s knowledge of, relevant experience with, and confidence in, 
the exporting Party, and shall  not be more trade restrictive than necessary to 
achieve t he importing Party’s appropriate level of protection.    Nothing in 
this paragraph prevents a P arty taking an emergency measure consistent with 
Article  6.12 (Emergency SPS Measures) . 
 
 
Article 6.10  
Certification  
 
1. If a Party requires import certification, it shall ensure that the SPS requirement for certification is applied only to the extent necessary to meet its SPS objectives and shall take into account guidance of the WTO SPS6 - 7 
 Committee and relevant international standards, guidelines and 
recommendations.  
 
2. The Parties may enter into consultations through the S PS Committe e, with 
the aim of agreeing principles , guidelines, or specific requirements for 
certification.  
 3. The Parties shall progress the implementation of paperless trade through electronic SPS certification and provide updates on implementation through the SPS Committee.  
  
Article 6.11 
Import C hecks and F ees 
 1. The importing Party shall have the right to carry out import checks based on 
the sanitary and phytosanitary risks associated with imports.  These checks 
shall be carried out without undue delay and with minimum trade disrupting effects.  
 2. If import chec ks reveal non -compliance with the relevant import 
requirements, the action taken by the importing Party must be based on an assessment of the risk involved and not be more trade -restrictive than 
required to achieve the Party's appropriate level of protection.   
3. The importing Party shall notify the importer of a non -compliant 
consignment, or its representative, of the reason for non- compliance, and , 
subject to its law , provide them with an opportunity for a review of the 
decision.  The importing Party shall consider any relevant information 
submitted to assist in the review.  
  
Article 6.12 
Emergency SPS Measures  
 1. If a Party adopts an emergency SPS measure necessary for the protection of 
human, animal or plant life or health, the Party shall notify the other Party of that measure through its contact point as soon as possible , and in any case no 
later than 48 hours after the decision to adopt the measure.   
2. On the request of the other Party, a Party adopting an emergency SPS measure shall engage in technical consultations under Article 6.15 ( Technical 
Consultations).  The Parties shall endeavour to hold technical consultations 
within 10 days of the receipt of  the request, and in any case consultations 
must be held as soon as possible following receipt of the request.  The Party 
that adopts the emergency SPS measure shall take into consideration any 
information provided by the other Party in response to the not ification and 
during technical consultations.6 - 8 
  
3. The importing Party shall consider, in a timely manner, information that was 
provided by the exporting Party when it makes its decision with respect to consignments that, at the time of adoption of the emergency SPS measure, 
are being transported between the Parties, in order to avoid unnecessary disruptions to trade.  
 
4. If a Party adopts an emergency SPS measure, it shall commence a science-
based review of the measure within  a reasonable period of time.  The Party 
shall then review the need for the emergency SPS measure as required, and 
if it remains in place provide, on request, the justification for maintaining the emergency  SPS measure.  
  
Article 6.13  
Cooperation 
  The Parties shall cooperate to strengthen collaboration between the 
Parties in their involvement in the work of relevant international organisations that develop international standards, guidelines and recommendations relevant to the matters covered by this Chapter.  
  
Article 6.14  
Transparency, N otification and Information Exchange 
 
1. The Parties acknowledge the value of exchanging information in a timely manner relating to their respective SPS measures and ensuring transparency in the implementation of such measures.  To this end, each Party shall 
facilitate the exchange of information on their respective sanitary and 
phytosanitary regimes. 
 2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of a:  
(a) significant change to pest or disease status;  and 
 
(b) significant food safety issue related to a good  traded between the 
Parties.  
 3. In particular, each Party shall, through the contact points designated under Article 6.17 (Competent Authorities and Contact Points) , on request, provide 
information to the other Party of any new or revised SPS measures, including measures imposed in response to an urgent threat to human, animal or plant life or health.  
 4. Where the information referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 has been made available via notification to the WTO’s Central Registry of Notifications, or6 - 9 
 to the relevant international organisa tions, the requirements in those 
paragraphs shall be deemed to be fulfilled. 
 
 
Article 6.15  
Technical Consultations  
 
1. If a Party has specific trade concerns regarding SPS measures proposed or 
implemented by the other Party, it may request technical consultations through the contact point.   
 2.  The responding Party shall provide a written reply to the requesting Party within 30 days of  the receipt of a request.  The Parties shall enter into 
technical consultations within 30 days of the requesting Party’s receipt of the reply, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  Such consultations may be 
conducted via teleconference, videoconference or any other means agreed by 
the Parties.  
 
3. The Parties shall endeavour to provide all relevant information necessary to 
avoid disruption to trade and to reach a mutually acceptable solution within a reasonable period of time.  
 4.  Where the Parties have already established other mechanisms than those referred to in this Article to address the concerns, they shall make use of them to the extent possible in order to avoid unnecessary duplication. 
  
Article 6.16  
Committee on SPS Measures  
 
1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the “SPS Committee”), composed of government representatives of each Party responsible for SPS matters.  
 2. The functions of the SPS Committee shall include:  
(a) monitoring implementatio n and considering any matter related to this 
Chapter; 
 
(b) providing an opportunity for the identification, prioritisation, 
discussion, and resolution of SPS issues ;  
 
(c) recommending any mutually agreed proposals for amendments to this Chapter to the Joi nt Committee; and   
 
(d) providing a forum to exchange information on each Party’s SPS regulatory system.6 - 10 
 3. The SPS Committee may, among other things: 
 
(a) identify opportunities for greater cooperation activities relevant to this Chapter, including trade facilitation initiatives and further work on eliminating unnecessary SPS barriers to trade between the Parties;  
 
(b) discuss, at an early stage, a change to, or a proposed change to, a SPS measure being considered;  
(c) facilitate improved understanding between the Parties on the implementation of the SPS Agreement, and promote cooperation between the Parties on SPS issues in multilateral fora, including the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, and  
relevant international organisations , as appropriate; and  
 
(d) provide opportunities to identify initiatives to strengthen bilateral technical cooperation relevant to this Chapter . 
 
4. The SPS Committee may establish technical working groups to address specific SPS issues with the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable resolution with the least disruption to trade.  Any technical working group established shall report to the SPS Committee on progress of its work.  
 
5. A Party may refer any SPS issue to the SPS Committee.   The SPS Committee 
shall consider the issue as expeditiously as possible.  If the SPS Committee is unable to resolve an issue it shall, at the request of a Party, report to the Joint Committee.  
    
6. The SPS Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force 
of this Agreement, and on annual basis, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  
7. The SPS Committee may decide to meet by videoconference or teleconference or by any such means as may be agreed by the Parties, and it may also address issues by correspondence.  
 8. The SPS Committee shall take decisions and make recommendations by consensus.  
 9. The SPS Committee shall report, as needed , on its activities and work 
programme to the Joint Committee .6 - 11 
 Article 6.17  
Competent Authorities and Contact P oints  
 
1. Each Party shall notify to the other Party a list of its competent authorities on 
entry into force of this Agreement.  The notification shall include contact information of these authorities.  
 2. Each Party shall also designate and notify a contact point to facilitate the exchange of information and any communication between the Parties relating to this Chapter  on entry into force of this Agreement. 
 3. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change  of its 
competent authorities, the contact information of its competent authorities , 
or its contact point.  
  
Article 6.18 
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  
 CHAPTER 7  
 
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE  
 
 
Article 7.1 
Definitions  
 
 For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms and definitions set out in 
Annex 1 to the TBT Agreement apply. 
  
Article 7.2 
Objective  
  The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate trade, including by 
eliminating unnecessary technical barriers to trade, enhancing transparency, and promoting greater regulatory cooperation and good regulatory practice. 
  
Article 7.3 
Scope  
 
1.  Unless otherwise provided in paragraph 4, this Chapter applies to the 
preparation, adoption, and application of all  technical regulations, standards,  
and conformity assessment procedures of the central level of government that may affect trade in goods between the Parties.  
 
2.  Each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to 
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chap ter by regional or local 
government bodies and non -governmental bodies within its territory which 
are responsible for the preparation, adoption , and application of technical 
regulations , standards,  and conformity assessment procedures.  
 
3.  All references in this Chapter to technical regulations, standards , and 
conformity assessment procedures shall be construed to include any 
amendments to them and any addition to the rules or the product coverage of those technical regulations, standards, and procedures.  
4.  This Chapter does not apply to:   ( a) technical specifications prepared by governmental  bodies  for the 
production or consumption requirements of such bodies ; or  
  (b)   sanitary or phytosanitary measures,  which are covered by Chapter 6 
(Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).  
 5.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining 
technical regulations, standards , or conformity assessment procedures in 
accordance with its rights and obligations under this Agreement, the TBT 
Agree ment , and any other relevant international agreement. 
 
 
Article 7.4 
Affirmation of the TBT Agreement  
 
  The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the 
TBT  Agreement.  
  
Article 7.5 
Technical Regulations  
 
1.  Each Party shall give positive consideration to accepting technical regulations of the other Party as equivalent to its own, even if these regulations differ from its own, provided that it is satisfied that these regulations adequately fulfil the objectives of its own regulations.  
2.  Where a Party does not accept a technical regulation of the other Party as equivalent to its own, it shall, on request of the other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.  
  
Article 7.6 
International Standards, Guides , and Recommendations  
 
1.  The Parties recognise the important role that international standards, guides , 
and recommendations can play in supporting greater regulatory alignment, good regulatory practice, and reducing unnecessary barriers to trade. 
 2.  Each Party shall, in accordance w ith Articles 2.4 and 5.4 of the TBT 
Agreement, use international standards, guides , and recommendations , or 
the relevant parts thereof , as a basis for its technical regulations and 
conformity assessment procedures.  
 
3.  Where a Party does not use an international standard, guide , or 
recommendation, or the relevant parts thereof , as a basis for a technical 
regulation or conformity assessment procedure, it shall, on request of the other Party, in accordance with Articles 2.5 and 5.4 of the TBT Agreement , 
explain the reasons for its decision.  
 
4.  Each Party shall encourage the standards bodies established within its 
territory to cooperate and exchange views with each other on matters under discussion in relevant international or regional bodies that develop international standards, guides, or recommendations relevant to this Chapter.  
  
5.  In determining  whether  an international standard, guide, or 
recommendation within the meaning of Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the 
TBT Agreement exists, each Party shall apply the Decisions and 
Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade Since 1 January 1995 (G/TBT/1/Rev.12), as may be revised, issued by 
the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade.
1 
  
Article 7.7 
Conformity Assessment Procedures 
 
1.  The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exists to facilitate the acceptance in a Party's territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted in the other Party's territory.  For example:  
 
(a)  a Party may agree with the other Party to accept the results of conformity assessment procedures that bodies located in the other Party's territory conduct with respect to specific technical regulations;  
 (b)  a Party may adopt accreditation  procedures for qualifying conformity 
assessment bodies located in the other Party's territory;  
 
(c)  a Party may recognise the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted in the other Party's territory;  
(d)  conformity assessment bodies located  in the territory of either  Party  
may enter into voluntary arrangements to accept the results of each other's assessment procedures; and  
 
(e)  the importing Party may rely on a supplier's declaration of conformity. 
 
2.  The Parties shall exchange information on the range of mechanisms 
relevant to conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories with a view to facilitating the acceptance of conformity assessment results.  
 3.  Where a Party does not accept the results of a conformity assessment 
procedure conducted in the territory of the other Party, it shall, on request of the other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.  
 
4.  The Parties acknowledge the trade facilitation role played by the Agreement on Mutual Recognition in Relation to Conformity Assessment, Certificates and Markings between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of Australia done at 
London on 18 January 2019, and the importance of cooperating in the fiel d 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, the Parties shall also consider relevant interpretations in reports of WTO panels 
and the Appellate Body adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.  
 of mutual recognition in relation to conformity assessment in accordance 
with that Agreement.  The Parties recognise that they may, in accordance 
with that Agreement, review and amend its provisions, including by extending its coverage, as appropriate.  
  
Article 7.8  
Marking and Labelling  
 1. Each Party shall,  in accordance with Article 2 of the TBT Agreement, in 
respect of technical regulations that include or deal exclusively with mandatory marking or labelling requirements: 
 
(a) accord treatment no less favourable to products imported from the territory of the other Party than that accorded to its own like products or those originating in any other country; and 
 (b)  ensure that such technical regulations are not prepared, adopted , or 
applied with a view to, or with the effect of, creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade.   For this purpose, such technical 
regulations shall not be more trade -restrictive than necessary to fulfil 
a legitimate objective, taking account of the risks non- fulfilment 
would create.  Such legitimate objectives are, inter alia , national 
security requirements, the prevention of deceptive practices, protection of human health or safety, animal or plant life or health, or the environment.  In assessing such risks, relevant elements of 
consideration are,  inter alia , available scientific and technical 
information, related processing technology, or intended end -uses of 
products. 
 2. Where a Party requires mandatory marking or labelling of products , the Party 
may accept, where it considers that legitimate objectives in accordance with the TBT Agreement are not compromised thereby: 
 
(a) non-permanent or detachable labels; or 
 (b) marking or labelling in the accompanying documentation in place of marking or labelling attached to the product. 
 
3.  Where an international system of nomenclature, pictograms, symbols , or 
graphics has been accepted by both Parties, such elements may be used.   The 
simultaneous use of additional languages shall not be prohibited, provided that the information provided in the additional languages does not constitute a contradictory, confusing, misleading, or deceptive statement regarding the product.  
 Article 7.9 
Transparency  
 
1.  Each Party shall allow persons of the other Party to participate in the 
development of its  technical regulations, standards , and conformity 
assessment procedures, subject to its laws and regulations, or administrative arrangements, on terms no less favourable than those accorded to its own persons. 
 2.  As appropriate, each Party shall encourage non- governmental bodies in its 
territory to observe paragraph 1 in relation to consultation procedures on standards and voluntary conformity assessment procedures which are available to the general publ ic. 
 3.  On request of the other Party, a Party shall provide the other Party with information regarding the objective of, and rationale for, a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that the Party has adopted or is proposing to adopt.  
  
Article 7.10 
Cooperation and Trade Facilitation 
 
1.  The Parties shall work cooperatively in the fields of standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating 
trade between the Parties.  Such cooperation may include:  
 
(a)  exchanging information regarding technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment procedures, and good regulatory practices; 
 (b)  increasing the harmonisation of their respective technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures with relevant 
international standards, guides, or recommendations; 
 (c)  enhancing cooperation in the development of standards in areas of shared interest in particular as regards new or emerging products or technolog ies; 
 (d)  enhancing cooperation and dialogue on mutually agreed regulatory issues;  
 (e)  increasing coordination, as appropriate, in relevant regional and international bodies relating to the development and application of standards and conformity assessment procedures; and  
 
(f)  other areas as agreed by the Parties.  
 2.  On request of the other Party, a Party shall give positive consideration to a 
sector -specific proposal that the requesting Party makes for further 
cooperation under this Chapter.   
Article 7.11 
Information Exchange 
  Any information or explanation that a Party provides in response to a 
request of the other Party in accordance with this Chapter shall be provided in print or electronically within a reasonable period, and where possible within 60 days of the first Party’s receipt of the request.  
  
Article 7.12  
Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade 
 
1.  The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (the “TBT Committee”), composed of government representatives of each Party 
responsible for technical barriers to trade matters.   The TBT Committee may 
also invite relevant persons, with the necessary expertise regarding the issues for discussion, to attend as observers. 
 
2.  The functions of the TBT Committee include:  
 
(a)  monitoring the operation and implementation of this Chapter; 
 (b)  providing a regular forum for information exchange on matters 
related to this Chapter;  
 
(c)  providing a forum for seeking to resolve differences that may arise 
regarding the interpretation or application of this Chapter; and  
 
(d)  considering any other matters referred to it by the Joint Committee.  
 
3.  The TBT Committee may establish working groups to undertake specific tasks related to its functions under this Chapter.  
 
4.  Where a Party declines to discuss an issue through the TBT Committee under paragraph 2, it shall , on the request of the other Party, explain the reasons for 
its decision.  
 5.  The TBT Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and on an annual basis, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  
 Article 7.13 
Contact Points  
 
 Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point to facilitate 
communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter.  
  
Article 7.14 
Dispute Settlement  
 
  Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  
  
Article 7.15  
Annex  
 1. The rights and obligations set out in Annex 7A (Cosmetics)  apply only with 
respect to the sector specified in that Annex.  
 
2.
 The scope of Annex 7A (Cosmetics)  is set out in that Annex.7A-1 
 ANNEX 7A  
 
COSMETICS  
 
 
1. For the purposes of this Annex: 
 
“marketing authorisation”  means the process or processes by which a 
Party approves or registers a product in order to authorise its marketing, 
distribution, or sale in the Party’s territory.  The process or processes 
may be described in a Party’s laws or regulations in various ways, 
including “marketing authorisation”, “authorisation”, “approval”, 
“registration”, “sanitary authorisation”, “sanitary registrati on”, and 
“sanitary approval” for a product. Marketing authorisation does not include notification procedures; and  
 
“post- market surveillance ” means procedures taken by a Party after a 
product has been placed on its market to enable the Party to monitor or 
address compliance with the Party’s domestic requirements for 
products. 
 
2.  This Annex applies to the preparation, adoption, and application  of 
technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment procedures, 
marketing authorisation,
1 and notification procedures of central 
government bodies that may affect trade in cosmetic products between the Parties.  This Annex does not apply to a technical specification prepared by a governmental entity for its production or consumption requiremen ts or a sanitary or phytosanitary measure. 
 3. Each Party’s obligations under this Annex appl y to any product that the 
Party defines as a cosmetic product pursuant to paragraph  4.  For the 
purposes of this Annex, preparation of a technical regulation, standard, conformity assessment procedure, or marketing authorisation includes, 
as appropriate, the evaluation of the risks involved, the need to adopt a measure to address those risks, the review of relevant scientific or technical information, and the consideration of the characteristics or design of alternative approa ches.  
 4.  Each Party shall define the scope of the products subject to its laws and regulations for cosmetic products in its territory and make that information publicly available.  
 5.  Recog nising that each Party is required to define the scope of products 
covered by this Annex pursuant to paragraph 4, for the purposes of this 
                                                            
1 The application of this Annex to marketing authorisations is without prejudice to whether a 
marketing authorisation meets the definition of a technical regulation, standard , or 
conformity assessment procedure.7A-2 
 Annex, a cosmetic product may include a product that is intended to be 
rubbed, poured, sprinkled, sprayed on, or othe rwise applied to the 
human body including the mucous membrane of the oral cavity and teeth, to cleanse, beautify, protect, promote attractiveness, or alter the 
appearance.  
 6.  Each Party shall identify the agency or agencies that are authorised to regulat e cosmetic products in its territory and make that information 
publicly available.  
 7. If more than one agency is authorised to regulate cosmetic products within the territory of a Party, that Party shall examine whether there is overlap or duplication in the scope of those authorities and eliminate unnecessary duplication of any regulatory requirements resulting for cosmetic products.  
 8. The Parties shall seek to collaborate through relevant international initiatives, such as those aimed at harmon isation , as well as regional 
initiatives that support those international initiatives, as appropriate, to improve the alignment of their respective regulations and regulatory activities for cosmetic products.  
 9. When developing or implementing regulations for cosmetic products, each Party shall consider relevant scientific or technical guidance documents developed through international  collaborative efforts.  Each 
Party is encouraged to consider regionally- developed scientific or 
technical guidance documents th at are aligned with international 
efforts.  
 10. Each Party shall observe the obligations set out in Articles 2.1 and 5.1.1 of the TBT Agreement with respect to a marketing authorisation, notification procedure , or elements of either that the Party prepares , 
adopts, or applies for cosmetic products and that do not fall within the 
definition of a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure. 
 11. Each Party shall ensure that it applies a risk -based approach to the 
regulation of cosmetic products. 
 12. In applying a risk- based approach in regulating cosmetic products, each 
Party shall take into account that cosmetic products are generally expected to pose less potential risk to human health or safety than medical devices or medicines.  
 13. Neither Party shall conduct separate marketing authorisation processes or sub- processes for cosmetic products that differ only with respect to 
shade extensions or fragrance variants, unless a Party identifies a significant human health or safety concern.7A-3 
  
14. Each Party shall administer any marketing authorisation process that it maintains for cosmetics products in a timely, reasonable, objective, transparent , and impartial manner, and identify and manage any 
conflicts of interest in order to mitigate any associated risks.  
 
(a)  If a Party requires marketing authorisation for a cosmetic product, that Party shall provide an applicant with its determination within a reasonable period of time.  
 
(b)  If a Party requires marketing authorisation for a cosmetic product and it determines that a marketing authorisation application for a cosmetic product under review in its jurisdiction has deficiencies that have led or will lead to a decision not to authorise its marketing, that Party shall inform the applicant that requests marketing authorisation and provide reasons why the application is deficient.  
 (c)  If a Party requires a marketing authorisation for a cosmetic product, the Party shall ensure that any marketing authorisation determination is subject to an appe al or review process that may 
be invoked at the request of the applicant.  For greater certainty, 
the Party may maintain an appeal or review process that is either internal to the regulatory body responsible for the marketing authorisation determination, such as a dispute resolution or review process, or external to the regulatory body. 
 (d)  If a Party has granted marketing authorisation for a cosmetic product in its territory, the Party shall not subject the product to periodic re -assessment procedures as  a condition of retaining its 
marketing authorisation. 
 15. If a Party maintains a marketing authorisation process for cosmetic products, that Party shall consider replacing this process with other mechanisms such as voluntary or mandatory notification and post-market surveillance.  
 16. When developing regulatory requirements for cosmetic products, each Party shall consider its available resources and technical capacity in order to minimise the implementation of requirements that could:  
 
(a)  inhibit the effectiveness of procedures for ensuring the safety or manufacturing quality of cosmetic products; or   
(b)  lead to substantial delays in marketing authorisation regarding cosmetic products for sale on that Party’s market.7A-4 
 17. Neither Party shall require the submission of marketing information, 
including with respect to prices or cost, as a condition for the product receiving marketing authorisation.  
 18. Neither Party shall require a cosmetic product to be labelled with a mark eting authorisation or notification number. 
 19.  Neither Party shall require that a cosmetic product receive marketing authorisation from a regulatory authority in the country of manufacture as a condition for the product receiving marketing authorisation from 
the Party.  For greater certainty, this provision does not prohibit a Party 
from accepting a prior marketing authorisation issued by another regulatory authority as evidence that a product may meet its own requirements.  
 20.  Neither Party shall req uire that a cosmetic product be accompanied by 
a certificate of free sale as a condition of marketing, distribution, or sale in the Party’s territory.  
 21.  If a Party requires a manufacturer or supplier of a cosmetic product to indicate information on the product’s label, the Party shall permit the manufacturer or supplier to indicate the required information by relabelling the product or by using supplementary labelling of the product in accordance with the Party’s domestic requirements after importation  but prior to offering the product for sale or supply in the 
Party’s territory.  
 22.  Neither Party shall require that a cosmetic product be tested on animals to determine the safety of that cosmetic product, unless there is no validated alternative method  available to assess safety.  A Party may, 
however, consider the results of animal testing to determine the safety of a cosmetic product.  
 23.  If a Party prepares or adopts good manufacturing practice guidelines for cosmetic products, it shall use releva nt international standards for 
cosmetic products, or the relevant parts of them, as a basis for its guidelines unless those international standards or relevant parts would be an ineffective or inappropriate means for the fulfilment of the legitimate object ives pursued.  
 24.  Each Party shall endeavour to share, subject to its laws and regulations, information from post- market surveillance of cosmetic products.  
 25.  Each Party shall endeavour to share information on its findings or the findings of its rel evant institutions regarding cosmetic ingredients.  
 26.  Each Party shall endeavour to avoid re -testing or re -evaluating 
cosmetic products that differ only with respect to shade extensions or7A-5 
 fragrance variants, unless conducted for human health or safety  
purposes. 
 
27.  In accordance with Article 7.10 (Cooperation and Trade Facilitation), 
each Party may share information on products which fall within its definition of a cosmetic product but which do not fall within that of the other Party.  
 CHAPTER 8 
 
CROSS -BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES  
 
 
Article 8.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“airport operation services ” means the operation or management, on a fee or 
contract basis, of airport infrastructure, including terminals, runways, taxiways and aprons, parking facilities, and intra -airport transportation 
systems.  Airport operation services do not include air navig ation services;  
 “computer reservation system services ” means services provided by 
computerised systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and fare rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;  
 “cross -border trade in services ” or “ cross-border supply of services ” means 
the supply of a service: 
 
(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other 
Party;  
 (b) in the territory of a Party to a person of the other Party; or  
 (c)  by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party ; 
 
but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a covered investment;  
 “enterprise ” means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.4 (General 
Definitions  – Initial Provisions and General Definitions ), and  a branch of an 
enterprise;  
 
“enterprise of a Party ” means:  
 
(a)  an enterprise as defined in Article 1. 4 (General Definitions – 
Initial Provisions and General Definitions), constituted or 
organised under the law of that Party, or a branch located in the territory of that  Party, and carrying out substantial 
business activities in the territory of that Party; or  (b)  an enterprise of a non -Party owned or controlled by a person 
of a Party ,1 if any of its vessels are registered in accordance 
with the l aw of that Party and flying the flag of that Party, 
when supplying services within the scope of Annex 8B 
(International Maritime Transport S ervices) using those 
vessels;  
 “ground handling services ” means the supply of a service on a fee or contract 
basis for:  airline representation, administration and supervision, ground 
administration and supervision, including load control and communications; passenger handling; baggage handling; ramp services; air cargo and mail 
handling; aviation fuel and oil handling; flight operations, crew 
administration and flight planning; aircraft servicing and cleaning; surface transport; and catering services. Ground handling services do not include: self-handling; security services; fixed intra -airport transport systems; line 
maint enance; aircraft repair and maintenance; or the operation or 
management of centralised airport infrastructure such as de -icing facilities, 
fuel distribution systems, or baggage handling systems;  “measures of a Party ” means measures adopted or maintained by 
 
(a) central, regional, or local governments or authorities; or  
 (b) non- governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated 
by central, regional, or local governments or authorities; 
 “selling and marketing of air transport services ” means opportunities for the 
air carrier concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of marketing such as market research, advertising and distribution.  These activities do not include the pricing of air transport 
services or the applicable conditions;  
“service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” means, for each 
Party, any service that  is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in 
competition with one or more service suppliers; 
 “service supplier  of a Party ” means a person of a Party that seeks to supply 
or supplies a service; and  
 “specialty air services ” means a specialised commercial operation using an 
aircraft whose primary purpose is not the transportation of goods or passengers, such as aerial fire-fighting, aerial advertising, flight training, 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty , “person of a Party ” in this subparagraph means: a national, or an “enterprise 
of a Party ” as defined in subparagraph ( a) of this definition .  sightseeing, spraying, surveying, mapping, photography, parachute  jumping, 
glider towing, and helicopter -lift for logging and construction, and other 
airborne agricultural, industrial and inspection services. 
 
 
Article 8.2 
Scope  
 1. This Chapter applies to measures of a Party affecting cross -border trade in 
services by service suppliers of the other Party.  Those measures include 
measures affecting:  
 
(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale or delivery of a service; 
 (b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;  
 
(c) the access to and use of distribution, transport or telecommunications 
networks and services in connection with the supply of a service; 
 
(d)  the presence in the Party’s territory of a service supplier of the other Party; and  
 
(e)  the provision of a bond or other form of financial security as a 
condition for the supply of a service. 
 2.  In addition to paragraph 1:   
(a)  Article  8.9 (Recognition) and 8.11 (Transparency) also apply to 
measures of a Party affecting  the supply of a service in its territory by 
a covered investment . 
 (b)  Article 8.8 (Domestic Regulation) also applies to measures of a Party 
that impose licensing requirements and procedures, qualification requirements and procedures, and technical standards ,
2 affect ing the 
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of a covered investment in the form of an enterprise, as these terms are defined in Article 13.1 
(Definitions  – Investment). 
 
                                                            
2 As far as measures relating to technical standards are concerned, Article 8.8 (Domestic Regulation) 
only applies to those measures a ffecting cross -border trade in services or the supply of services in its 
territory by a covered inves tment in the form of an enterprise.  (c)  Annex 8A (Express Delivery Services) also applies to measures of a 
Party affecting the supply of express delivery services, including by 
a covered investment.  
 (d)  Annex 8B (International Maritime Transport Services) also applies to 
measures of a Party affecting the supply  of international maritime 
transport services;  
 3.  This Chapter does not apply to:  
(a)  financial services as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions – Financial 
Services ); 
 
(b)  government procurement; 
 (c)  services supplied in the exercise of governmental  authority;
3 
 (d)  subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government -
supported loans, guarantees and insurance ; or 
  (e)  audio- visual services. 
 
4.  This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a 
national of the other  Party who seeks access to its employment market or who 
is employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not confer any right on that national with respect to that access or employment.   For greater 
certainty, this Chapter does not apply to measures regarding citizenship, 
nationality or residence on a permanent basis.  
 
5.  This Chapter shall not apply to air services, including domestic and international air transportation services, whether scheduled or non -
scheduled, or to related services in su pport of air services, other than the 
following: 
 
(a)  repair and maintenance services on an aircraft  or a part thereof  during 
which the aircraft or the part is withdrawn from service , and aircraft 
line maintenance;  
 
(b)  selling and marketing of air transport services;  
                                                            
3 Article  8.8 (Domestic Regulation) does not apply  to activities carried out in the exercise of 
governmental authority.  “activities carried out in the exercise of governmental authority” means  
activities carried out neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more economic 
operators.   
(c)  computer reservation system services;  
 
(d)  specialty air services;4  
 
(e) airport operation services; and 
 
(f)  ground handling services. 
 
6.  In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and a bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral air services agreement to which both Parties are 
party, the air services agreement shall prevail in determining the rights and obligations of the Parties. 
 7.  If the Parties have the same obligations under this Agreement and a bilateral, plurilateral, or multilateral air services agreement, they may invoke the 
dispute settlement procedures of this Agreement only after any dispute settlement procedures in the other agreement have been exhausted.  
 8.  If the Annex on Air Transport Services of  GATS is amended, the Parties may 
jointly review any new definitions. 
 
 
Article 8.3 
National Treatment
5 
 
1.  Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party  
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own services and service suppliers.  
 2.  For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less 
favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like 
circumstances, by that regional level of government to service suppliers of the Party of which it forms a part. 
  
 
 
                                                            
4 Subject to compliance with each Party’s laws and regulations governing the admission of aircraft 
to, departure from and operation within, their territory.  
5 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 8 .3 
(National Treatment) or Article 8 .4 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the 
circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between services or service 
suppliers on the basis of legitimate public welfare obj ectives.   
Article 8.4 
Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment 
 
Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other 
Party  treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, 
to services and service suppliers of a non- Party.6 
 
 
Article 8.5 
Market Access  
 
Neither Party shall adopt or maintain, either on the basis of its entire 
territory or on the basis of the territory of a central, regional or local level of 
government, a measure that:  
 
(a)  imposes a limitation  on: 
 
(i)  the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;  
 
(ii)  the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; 
 
(iii)  the total number of service operations or the total quantity of 
service output expressed in terms of designated numerical 
units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic 
needs test;
7 or 
 
(iv)  the total number of natural persons that may be employed in 
a particular service sector or that a service supplier may 
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the 
supply of a specific service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or  
 
(b)  restricts or require s specific types of legal entity or joint venture 
through which a service supplier may supply a service. 
 
 
                                                            
6 For greater certainty , this paragraph does not cover treatment accorded by the United Kingdom to 
services and service suppliers of territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is 
responsible . 
7 Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.   
Article 8.6 
Local Presence 
 
Neither Party shall require a service supplier of the other Party to 
establish or maintain a representative office or any form of  enterprise, or to 
be resident, in its territory as a condition for the cross -border supply of a 
service.  
 
 
Article 8.7 
Non-Conforming Measures  
 1.  Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured-Nation 
Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) and Article 8.6 (Local Presence) do 
not apply to: 
 
(a)  any existing non- conforming measure that is maintained by a Party 
at:  
 
(i)  the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; 
 
(ii)  a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; or  
 
(iii)  a local level of government; 
 
(b)  the continuation or prompt renewal of any non- conforming measure 
referred to in subparagraph (a); or 
 
(c)  an amendment to any non- conforming measure referred to in 
subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most -
Favoured- Nation Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) or Article 
8.6 (Local Presence) . 
 2.  Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured-Nation 
Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) and Article 8.6 (Local Presence)  do 
not apply to any measure of a Party with respect to sectors, sub -sectors or 
activities, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex II.  
 
3.  If a Party considers that a non -conforming measure applied by a regional 
level of government of the other Party, as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(ii),  creates a material impediment to the cross- border supply of services in 
relation to the former Party, it may request consultations with regard to that 
measure.  The Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging 
information on the operation of the measure and to considering whether 
further steps are necessary and appropriate.8 
 
 
Article 8.8 
Domestic Regulation  
 
1. For the purposes of this Article:  
 
“authorisation” means permission for the cross -border supply of a service or 
for the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition of a covered investment in the form of an enterprise  resulting from a procedure a person of a Party must adhere to 
in order to demonstrate compliance with licensing requirements, qualification requirements or technical standards;  
 “competent authority” means a central, regional or local government or authority or non- governmental body in the exercise of powers delegated by 
a central, regional or local government or authority , which is entitled to take 
a decision  concerning authorisa tion. 
 2. (a) Subject to subparagraph (b), this Article applies to measures of a 
Party  relating to licensing requirements and procedures, qualification 
requirements and procedures, and technical standards. 
 
(b) This Article does not apply to a measure to the extent that the measure 
is not subject to an obligation in this Chapter or Chapter 13 
(Investment) by reason of Article 8.7 (Non- Conforming Measures) or 
Article 13. 13 (Non -Conforming Measures – Investment ).  
 3. Each Party sha ll ensure that measures relating to authorisation are based on 
criteria which preclude a competent authority from exercising its power of assessment in an arbitrary manner.   If a Party adopts or maintains a measure 
relating to authorisation, it shall ensure that:  
 
(a)  those measures are based on criteria
9 that are:  
                                                            
8 For greater certainty, a Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding non -
conforming measures applied by the central level of government, as referred to in subpara graph 
1(a)(i).  
9 Those criteria may include,  but are not limited to, competence and the ability to supply a service  or 
carry out an activity  including to do so in a manner consistent with the Party’s regulatory   
(i)  clear and transparent ; 
 
(ii)  objective; and 
 (iii)  established in advance and made publicly accessible.  
 
(b)  the procedures are impartial, easily accessible to all applicants and that the procedures are adequate for applicants to demonstrate 
whether they meet the requirement s, where those requirements exist;  
 
(c) the procedures do not in themselves unjustifiably prevent the 
fulfilment of requirements; and  
 (d)  those measures do not discriminate between men and women .
10 
 
4.  ( a) If a Party requires authorisation, the Party shall promptly publish11  
the information necessary for service suppliers of a Party  or persons 
carrying out or seeking to carry out the activity for which 
authorisation is required to comply with the requirements and 
procedures for obtaining, maintaining, amending and renewing that authorisation.  Each Party shall ensure that this information is easily 
accessible through electronic means.  Where it exists, that information  
shall include but is not limited to:  
 
(i) the requirements and procedures;  
 
(ii) contact information of relevant competent authorities; 
 
(iii) fees;  
 
(iv) technical standards;  
 
(v) procedures for appeal or review of decisions  concerning 
applications;  
 
                                                            
requirements, such as health and environmental requirements.   Competent authorities may assess the 
weight to be given to each criterion.  
10 Differential treatment that is reasonable and objective, and aims to achieve a legitimate purpose, 
and adoption by a Party of temporary special measures aimed at accelerating de facto  equality between 
men and women, shall not be considered discrimination for the purposes of this subparagraph.  
11 For purposes of these disciplines, "publish" means to include in an official publication, such as an 
official journal, or on an official website.  Each  Party is encouraged to consolidate electronic 
publications into a single portal.  (vi) procedures for monitoring or enforcing compliance with the 
terms and conditions of licences or qualifications; 
 
(vii) opportunities for public involvement, such as through hearings or comments ; 
 
(viii) indicative or, to the extent possible, fixed timeframes for 
processing of an application; and 
 
(ix)  the length of authorisation, and where relevant, the date of its 
renewal . 
 
b) Each Party shall require its competent authorities to respond to any reasonable request for information or assistance, to the extent 
practicable.  
 
5.  If a Party requires authorisation, it shall, to the extent practicable ensure that 
its competent authorities avoid requiring an applicant to approach more than one competent authority for each application for authorisation, recognising  
that if an activity for which authorisation is requested is within the jurisdiction of multiple competent authorities, multiple applications for authorisation may be required. 
 6.  If a Party requires authorisation, it shall ensure that its competent autho rities: 
 
(a)  to the extent practicable, permit the submission of an application at any time throughout the year .
12  If a specific time period for applying 
exists, the Party shall ensure that its competent authorities allow a reasonable period of time for t he submission of an application; 
 (b)  to the extent possible , accept applications in electronic format.  For 
greater certainty, this includes applications made from within the 
territory of the other Party; 
 
(c) accept copies of documents, that are authenticated in accordance with 
the Party’s law, in place of original documents, unless the competent authorities require original documents to protect the integrity of the 
authorisation process; 
 
(d)  to the extent practicable, publish in advance a fixed or indicative 
timeframe for processing of an application;  
 
                                                            
12 For greater certainty , competent  authorities are not required to start considering applications outside 
of their official working hours and working days.  (e) at the request of the applicant, provide without undue delay 
information concerning the status of the application; 
 (f)  to the extent practicable, ascertain without undue delay the completene ss of an application for processing under the Party’s laws 
and regulations; 
 (g)  if they  consider an application complete for processing under the 
Party’s laws and regulations ,
13 within a reasonable period of time 
after the submission of the applications, ensure that:  
 
(i)  
the
 processing of the application is completed;  
 (ii)  the applicant is informed of the decision concerning the application
14 to the extent possible in writing ;15 and 
 
(iii)  an authorisation is granted as soon as the competent authority 
determines that the conditions for authorisation have been met; 
 (h) i f they  consider an application incomplete for processing under the 
Party’s laws and regulations, within a reasonable period of time, to 
the extent practicable:  
 
(i)  inform the applicant that the application is incomplete;  
 
(ii)  at the request of an applicant, identify the additional 
information required to complete the application and provide 
guidance to the  applicant about the type of information 
required to complete the application ; and 
 
(iii)  provide the applicant with the opportunity
16 to correct 
deficiencies;  
 however, if none of the above is practicable, and the application is rejected due to incomplet eness, ensure that they inform the applicant 
within a reasonable period of time; and  
                                                            
13 Competent authorities may require that all information is submitted in a specified format to consider 
it "complete for pr ocessing". 
14 Competent authorities may meet this requirement by informing an applicant in advance, in writing, 
including through a published measure, that lack of response after a specified period of time from the 
date of submission of an application indicates accepta nce of the application.  
15 "In writing" may include in electronic form.  
16 The opportunity does not require a competent authority to provide extensions of deadlines.   
(i) i f an application is rejected, to the extent possible, either upon their 
own initiative or upon request of the applicant, inform the applicant of the reasons for rejection and, if applicable, the procedures for resubmission of an application.  An applicant should not be prevented 
from submitting another application
17 solely on the basis of a 
previously rejected application. 
 7.  Each  Party shall ensure that authorisation, once granted, enters into effect 
without undue delay, subject to applicable terms and conditions.
18 
 
8.  Each Party shall ensure that the authorisation fees19 charged by its competent 
authorities are made public, reaso nable, transparent, and do not in themselves 
restrict the supply of the relevant service or the carrying out  of the relevant 
activity.   Each Party is encouraged to accept payment of authorisation fees 
by electronic means.  
 
9.  If a Party requires examinati ons for authorisation, it shall: 
 
(a)  ensure that its competent authorities schedule the examination at reasonably frequent intervals and provide a reasonable period of time to enable applicants to request to take the examination; and  
 (b)  to the extent practicable, accept requests in electronic format to take those examinations and consider the use of electronic means in other aspects of the examination processes.  
 
10.  If a Party adopts or maintains a measure relating to authorisation, it shall 
ensure that its competent authority processes an application, reaches and administers its decisions objectively, impartially and in a manner independent from any supplier of the service or person carrying out the 
activity  for which authorisation is required .
20 
 11.  Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner. 
 
                                                            
17 Competent authorities may require that the content of the application has been revised.  
18 Competent authorities are not responsible for delays due to reasons outside their competence.  
19 Authorisation fees do not include fees for the use of natural resources, payments for auction, 
tendering or other non- discriminat ory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to 
universal service obligation.  
20 For greater certainty,  this paragraph does not ma ndate a particular administrative structure; it refers 
to the decision -making process and administering of decisions .  12.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for 
adopting measures, each Party21 shall publish in advance: 
 
(a)  laws or regulations of general application it proposes to adopt in relation to matters falling within the scope of paragraph 2; or  
 
(b)  documents that provide sufficient details about that possible new  law 
or regulation to allow interested persons or the other Party to assess 
whether and how their interests might be significantly affected.  
 13.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for 
adopting measures, each Party is encouraged to apply paragraph 12 to procedures and administrative rulings of general application it proposes to adopt in relation to matters falling within the scope of paragraph 2. 
 14.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for 
adopting measures, each Party shall provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on those proposed measures or documents published under paragraphs 12 and 13. 
 15.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for adopting measures, each Party shall consider comments received under 
paragraph 14.
22 
 
16.  In publishing a law or regulation referred to in subparagraph 12(a), or in advance of that publication, to the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for adopting measures, a Party is encouraged 
to explain the purpose and rationale of that law or regulation. 
 
17.  Each Party shall, to the extent practicable, endeavour to allow reasonable time between the publication of the text of a law or regulation referred to in 
subparagraph 12(a) and the date on which service suppliers of a Party or 
persons carrying out or seeking to carry out an activity must comply with that 
law or regulation.  
 18.  Each Party shall encourage its competent authorities, when adopting technical standards, to adopt technical standards developed through open and 
transparent processes, and shall encourage any body, including relevant 
                                                            
21 Paragraphs 12 to 15 recognise that each Party has different systems to consult interested persons 
on certain measures before they are adopted, and that the alternatives set out in  paragraph 12 reflect 
different legal systems.  
22 This paragraph is without prejudice to the final  decision of a Party that adopts or maintains any 
measure for authorisation.  international organisations ,23 designate d to develop technical standards to 
use open and transparent processes.  
 
19.  If the number of licences available for a given activity is limited because of the scarcity of available natural resources or technical capacity, a Party shall apply a selection procedure to potential candidates which is impartial and 
transparent and provides for adequate publicity about the launch, conduct and 
completion of the procedure.  The selection procedure  may take into account 
legitimate policy objectives, including consi derations of health, safety, the 
protection of the environment and the preservation of cultural heritage. 
 20.  Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for 
responding to enquiries from service suppliers of a Party and persons carrying  out or seeking to carry out an activity. 
  
Article 8.9 
Recognition 
 1.  For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of a Party’s standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, the  Party may recognise the  
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of a non -Party.  That recognition, which 
may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or arrangement with the non- Party concerned, or may be accorded 
autonomously. 
 2.  If a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement, the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of a non -Party, nothing in Article 8.4 
(Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment)  or Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured- Nation 
Treatment  – Investment ) shall be construed to require the Party to accord 
recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of the other Party. 
 3.  If a Party is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in 
paragraph 1, whether existing or future, t he Party shall afford adequate 
opportunity to the other Party, on request, to negotiate its accession to that 
agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement.   If a Party accords recognition  autonomously, the Party shall 
afford adequate opportunity to the other Party to demonstrate that education, 
                                                            
23 The term “ relevant international organisations" refers to international bodies whose membership is 
open to the relevant bodies of each Party.  experience, licences or certifications obtained or requirements met in that 
Party’s territory should be recognised. 
 
4.  Neither Party shall accord recognition in a manner that would constitute a means of discrimination between a Party and a non -Party in the application 
of its standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of 
service suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in services.  
 
 
Article 8.10 
Denial of Benefits  
 
A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of 
the other Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to services of that services supplier if persons of a non -Party own or control the enterprise, and 
the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non- Party 
or a person of the non- Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or 
that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise or to services of that enterprise.  
  
Article 8.11 
Transparency  
 1.  Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for responding to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations that relate to the subject matter of this Chapter.
24 
 2.  If a Party does not provide advance notice and opportunity for comment pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 28.2 (Publication  – Transparency and Anti -
Corruption ) with respect to regulations that relate to the subject matter in this 
Chapter, it shall, to the extent practicable, provide in writing or otherwise 
notify interested persons of the reasons for not doing so. 
 
3.  To the extent possible, each Party shall allow reasonable time between publication of final regulations and the date when they enter into effect. 
 
 
Article 8.12 
Payments and Transfers 
 
                                                            
24 The implementation of the obligat ion to maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms may need to 
take into account the resource and budget constraints of small administrative agencies.  1.  Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments that relate to the cross-
border supply of services to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.  
 2.  Each Party shall permit transfers and payments that relate to the cross- border 
supply of services t o be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate 
of exchange that prevails at the time of transfer.  
 3.  Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer 
or payment through the equitable, non- discriminatory and good faith 
application of its law
25 that relates to:  
 
(a)  bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors; 
 
(b)  issuing, trading or dealing in securities or derivatives; 
 
(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;  
 
(d)  criminal or penal offences; or  
 
(e)  ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or 
administrative proceedings.  
 
 
Article 8.13 
Committee  on Services and Investment  
 1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Services and Investment, 
composed of government representatives of each Party.
26 
 2.  The Committee shall:  
 
(a)  review and monitor the implementation and operation of this Chapter (which includes  Annex 8A (Express Delivery Services) and Annex 
8B (International Maritime Transport Services)), Chapter 9 (Financial Services) (which includes Annex 9A (Cross -Border Trade 
in Financial Services), Annex 9B (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) and Annex 9C (Financia l Services Regulatory 
Cooperation)), Chapter 10 (Professional Services and the 
                                                            
25 For greater certainty, this Article does not preclude the equitable, non -discriminatory and good faith  
application of a Party’s law relating to its social security, public retirement or compulsory savings 
programmes.  
26 Representatives of the authorities responsible for financial services as specified in Annex 9 B 
(Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) will discuss matters relating to financial services.  Recognition of Professional Qualifications), Chapter 11 (Temporary 
Entry for Business Persons), Chapter 12 (Telecommunications), Chapter 13 (Investment), and Chapter 14 (Digital  Trade) (“the 
relevant Chapters”);  
 (b) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment between the 
Parties, including through amendments to each Party’s Schedules 
to Annex I (Schedules of Non- conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment), Annex II (Schedules of Non- conforming Measures for 
Services and Investment), Annex III (Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures for Financial Services)  and Annex IV (Schedules of 
Specific Commitments on Temporary Entry  for Business 
Persons);  and 
 (c) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties in relation to the relevant Chapters.  
 3. The Committee may:  
 
(a)  make recommendations, or refer matters, to the Joint Committee;  
 
(b)  establish ad hoc  working groups, as appropriate;  
 
(c) refer matters to any ad hoc  or standing working group or any other 
subsidiary body related to the relevant Chapters; and 
 
(d)  consider any other matter related to the relevant Chapters, or as 
directed by the Joint Committee.   
 
4. The Committee shall meet one year after entry into force, and thereafter as agreed by both Parties. 
 
5. The Committee shall report to the Joint Committee.9 - 1 CHAPTER 9 
 
FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
 
Article 9.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“cross -border financial service supplier”  means a person of a Party that is 
engaged in the business of supplying a financial service within the territory of the Party and that seeks to supply or supplies a financial service through the cross-border supply of that service;   “cross -border trade in financial services” or “ cross- border supply of financial 
services” means the supply of a financial service:  
 
(a)  from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;  
 
(b)  in the territory of a Party to a person of the other Party; or  
 (c)  by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party, 
 but does not include the supply of a financial service in the territory of a Party by an investment in that territory;  
 “commercial presence”  means any type of business or professional 
establishment, including through:  
(a)  the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of an enterprise; 
or 
 (b)  the creation or maintenance of a branch or representative  
office,  
 within the territory of a Party for the  purposes of supplying a service , 
including a financial service;  
 “electronic payments” means the payer’s transfer of a monetary claim 
acceptable to the payee made through electronic means;  
 “enterprise of a Party” means:  
 
(a)  an enterprise constituted or  organised under the law of that 
Party and carrying out substantial business activities in the territory of that Party; or9 - 2 
 
 (b)  an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the law of 
that Party and is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by  
a national of that Party or by an enterprise referred to in subparagraph (a); 
 “established financial service supplier” means a financial service supplier that supplies a financial service through commercial presence;  
 “established financial service suppl ier of the other Party ” means an 
established financial service supplier  located in the territory of a Party that is 
controlled by a person of the other Party;  “financial service supplier”  means any person of a Party seeking to supply or 
supplying financial services, but does not include a public entity;  “financial service ” means any service of a financial nature, including all 
insurance and insurance related services , all banking and other financial 
services (excluding insurance),  and services incidental or auxiliary to a 
service of a financial nature. Financial services include the following activities:  
 
Insurance and insurance- related services  
 
(a)  direct insurance (including co -insurance):  
 
(i)  life;  
 (ii)  non- life;  
 
(b)  reinsurance and retrocession;  
 (c)  insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; and  
 (d)  services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment , and claim settlement services;  
 
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)  
 
(e)  acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public; 
 (f)  lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring, and financing of commercial transactions; 
 (g)  financial leasing;9 - 3 
 
 (h)  all payment and money transmission services, including 
credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques, and bankers 
drafts;  
 (i)  guarantees and commitments;  
 (j)  trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in an over- the-counter market or otherwise, 
the following: 
 
(i) money market instruments (including cheques, bills or certificates of deposits);  
 (ii)  foreign exchange; 
  (iii)  derivative products including futures and options; 
 (iv)  exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as swaps, forward rate agreements;  
 (v)  transferable securities; or  
 
(vi)  other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion; 
 
(k)  participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately), and provision of services related to those issues;  
 (l)  money broking; 
 (m)  asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of collective investment management, pension fund 
management, custodial, depository, and trust services;  
 (n)  settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;  
 (o)  provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related sof tware by suppliers of other 
financial services;  and 
 (p)  advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities listed in subparagraphs (e) through (o) , 
including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, and advice on acquisitions and 
on corporate restructuring and strategy;9 - 4 
 
  
"financial service computing facility" means a computer server or storage device for the processing or storage of information for commercial use but does not include computer servers or storage devices of, or used to operate , 
financial market infrastructures;  
 “financial market infrastructures” means systems in which financial service suppliers participate with other financial service suppliers, including the operator of the system, used for the purposes of  clearing, settling,  or 
recording of payments, securities , derivatives , or other financial transactions; 
 “investment”  means “investment” as defined in Art icle 13.1 (Definitions - 
Investment ),
1 except that for the purposes of this Chapte r, with respect to 
“loans” and “debt instruments” referred to in that Article:  
 
(a)  a loan to or debt instrument issued by an established financial 
service supplier is an investment only if it is treated as regulatory capital by the Party in whose territory the established financial service supplier is located; and  
 (b)  a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by an established 
financial service supplier , other than a loan to or debt 
instrument issued by an established financial service supplier  
referred to in subparagraph (a), is not an investment; 
 “investor”  means a Party, or a person of a Party, that attempts to make ,
2 is 
making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party;  “new financial service”  means a financial service, including services related 
to existing and new products or the manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied by any financial service supplier in the territory of a Party, 
but which is supplied in the territory of the other Party;  
 “person of a Party ” means a national or an enterprise of a Party  and, for 
greater certainty, does not include a branch of an enterprise of a non -party; 
 “public entity”  means:  
 
(a)  a government, a central bank or a monetary authority of a Party or any entity owned or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in carrying out governmental functions or 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a cross -border financial service 
supplier, other than a loan to or debt instrument issued by  an established financial service supplier, is 
an investment for the purposes of Chapter 13  (Investment) , if that loan or debt instrument meets the 
criteria for “investment” set out in Article 13.1 (Definitions - Investment).  
2  For greater certainty, the Parties understand that an investor “attempts to make” an investment when 
that investor has  taken concrete action or actions to make an investment, such as channelling resources 
or capital in order to set up a business, or applying for permits or licences.9 - 5 
 
 activities for governmental purposes, not including an entity 
principally engaged in supplying financial services on commercial terms; or  
 (b)  a private entity performing functions normally performed by a central bank or monetary authority when exercising those functions; and  
 “self-regulatory organisation”  means any non- governmental body, including 
any securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or  other 
organisation or association, that exercises regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service suppliers by statute or delegation from central  or 
regional government.  
  
Article 9.2 
Scope  
 1.  This Chapter applies to any measure adopted or maintained by a Party 
affecting trade in financial services with respect to:  
 
(a)  an established financial service supplier of the other Party;  
 (b)  an investor of the other Party, and an investment  of that investor, in 
an established financial service supplier  in the Party’s territory; and  
 (c)  cross- border financial service suppliers.  
 2.  Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services) and Chapter 13 (Investment)  
apply to measures described in paragraph 1 only to the extent that those Chapters or Articles of those Chapters are incorporated into this Chapter:  
 
(a)  Article 8.10 (Denial of Benefits – Cross -Border Trade in Services),  
Article 13.7 (Minimum Standard of Treatment – Investment), Article 
13.8 (Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife – 
Investment), Article 13.9 (Expropriation and Compensation – 
Investment), Article 13.10 (Transfers – Investment), Article 13. 14 
(Subrogation – Investment), Article 13.15 (Special Formalities and 
Information Requirements – Investment), Article 13.16 (Denial of 
Benefits – Investment), Article 13.17 (Investment and Environmental, 
Health and other Regulatory Objectives – Investment), Article 13.18 
(Investment and the Environment – Investment), and Article 13.19 
(Corporate Social Responsibility – Investment) are incorporated into 
and made a part of this Chapter ; and   
 (b)  Article 8.12 ( Payments and Transfers – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services ) is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter to the 
extent that cross- border trade in financial services is subject to9 - 6 
 
 obligations pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article  9.5 ( National 
Treatment) and subparagraph 1(c) of Article 9.6 (Market Access) . 
 
3.  This Chapter does not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party 
relating to:  
 
(a)  activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or statutory system of social security; or  
 (b)  activities or services conducted for the account or with the guarantee or using the financial resources of the Party, including its public entities,  
 
except that this Chapter  applies to the extent that a Party allows any of the 
activities or services referred to in subparagraph (a) or (b) to be conducted by its financial service suppliers in competition with a public entity  or a financial 
service supplier.  
 4.  This Chapter does not apply to government procurement of financial 
services.  
 5.  This Chapter does  not apply to subsidies or grants  provided by a Party with 
respect to the supply of financial services, including government -supported 
loans, guarantees and insurance.  
 6.  This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of the other Party who seeks access to its employment market or who is employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not confer any right on that national with res pect to that access or employment.   For 
greater certainty, this Chapter does not apply to measures regarding citizenship, nationality or residence on a permanent basis.  
  
Article 9.3  
Prudential Exception 
 1.  Notwithstanding any other provisions  of this Chapter and Agreement except 
for Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin 
Procedures), Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures  and Trade Facilitation), 
Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) , and Chapter 7 (Technical 
Barriers to Trade), a Party shall not be prevented  from adopting or 
maintaining measures for prudential reasons ,
3 including:  
 
(a) the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders, or persons to whom a financial service supplier owes a fiduciary duty; 
 
                                                            
3 The Parties understand that the term ‘prudential reasons’ includes the  maintenance of th e safety, 
soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility  of payment, settlement and clearing systems.9 - 7 
 
 (b)  the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial 
responsibility of an established financial service supplier or, a cross-border financial service supplier; or  
 (c)  ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party’s financial system.  
 2.  Where those measures do not conform with the provisions of this Agreement 
to which this exception applies , they shall not be used as a means of avoiding 
the Party's commitments or obligations under those provisions.  
  
Article 9.4  
Specific Exceptions  
 1.  Nothing in this Chapter, Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services), 
Chapter 12 (Telecommunications) , Chapter 13 (Investment)  or Chapter 14  
(Digital Trade ), shall  apply to measures taken or activities conducted by a 
central bank or  monetary authority or  by any other  public entity in pursuit of 
monetary policies  and related credit policies, or exchange rate policies. This 
paragraph shall not affect a Party’s obligations under Article 13.11 
(Performance Requirements – Investment)  with respect to measures 
covered by Chapter 13 (Investment) , under Article 13.10 (Transfers – 
Investment)  or Article 8.12 (Payments and Transfers – Cross -Border Trade 
in Services) . 
 2.  Nothing in this Chapter shall require a Party to:  
 
(a)  furnish or allow access to information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial service suppliers or to any confidential or proprietary information which, if disclosed, would impede law enforcement, interfere with specific regulatory or supervisory matters, or would otherwise be contrary to public interest or prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises ; 
or 
 (b)  disclose confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.9 - 8 
 
 Article 9. 5 
National Treatment4  
 
1.  Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less 
favourable than that it accords , in like circumstances,  to its own investors 
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, 
conduct, operation, and  sale or other disposition  of established financial 
service suppliers, and investments in established financial service suppliers 
in its territory.  
 
2.  Each Party shall accord to established financial service suppliers of the other 
Party, and to investments of investors of the other Party in established 
financial service suppliers, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, 
in like circumstances, to its own established financial service suppliers, and 
to investments of its own investors in established financial service suppliers  
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, 
conduct, operation, and  sale or other disposition  of established financial 
service suppliers and investments.  
 
3.  Each Party shall accord to:  
 
(a)  financial services as specified by the Party in Annex 9A (Cross -
Border Trade in Financial Services ) or cross -border financial servic e 
suppliers of the other Party seeking to supply or supplying those 
financial services; and  
 (b)  cross- border financial service suppliers of the other Party seeking to 
supply or supplying financial services as defined in subparagraph (b) or subparagraph (c)  of the definition of “ cross- border trade in 
financial services” or financial services supplied through that cross-
border trade, 
 
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to 
its own financial services and financial service suppliers .  
 4.  For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1  through 3 means, with respect to a regional level of government, 
treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regi onal level of government to established 
financial service suppliers, investors, and investments of those investors in established financial service suppliers, or financial services or financial 
service suppliers,  of the Party of which it forms a part.  
 
                                                            
4 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 9.5 
(National Treatment) or Article 9.8 ( Most- Favoured- Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the 
circumstances, including whether the relevant  treatment distinguishes between investors, 
investments, established financial service suppliers or financial service suppliers on the basis of 
legitimate public welfare objectives.9 - 9 
 
 Article 9. 6 
Market Access  
 
1.  A Party shall not adopt or maintain, with respect to:  
 
(a)  an established financial service supplier of the other Party;  
 (b)   an investor or an investment of an investor of the other Party in an established financial service supplier in the Party’s territory; or 
 (c)  a cross -border financial service supplier of the other Party:  
 
(i) seeking to supply or supplying the financial services as specified by the Party in Annex 9A ( Cross -Border Trade in 
Financial Services ); or 
 (ii)  seeking to supply or supplying financial services as defined in subparagraph (b)  or subparagraph (c)  of the definition of 
“cross -border trade in financial services ”, 
 
either on the basis of its entire territory or on the basis of the territory of a central, regional, or local level of government, a measure that:  
 
(d)  imposes limitations on:  
 
(i)  the number of established financial service suppliers or cross -
border financial service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;  
 (ii)  the total value of financial service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;  
 (iii)  the total number of financial service operations or the total quantity of financial services output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the 
requirement of an economic needs test ;
5  
 (iv)
  the
 participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum 
percentage limit on foreign shareholding in established financial service suppliers or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment in established financial service suppliers;  
 
                                                            
5 Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of 
financial services.9 - 10 
 
 (v)  the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a 
particular financial services sector or that an established financial service supplier or cross- border financial service 
supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific financial service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or  
 
(e)  restricts or requires specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which an established financial service supplier or cross -
border financial service supplier may supply a service.  
 2.  For greater certainty, this Article does not prevent a Party imposing terms, conditions, and procedures for the authorisation of the establishment and expansion of a commercial presence in so far as they do not circumvent the Party’s obligation under paragraph 1 and are consistent with the other provisions of this Chapter.  
 
 
Article 9.7  
Local Presence 
 
Neither Party shall require a cross- border financial service supplier of 
the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office, or an enterprise or a branch of an enterprise, or to be resident in its territory, as a condition for the cross -borde r supply of a financial service.  With respect to 
cross- border supply as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “ cross-
border trade in financial services”, this Article only applies to the financial services specified by the Party in Annex 9A ( Cross -Border Trade in Financial 
Services ). 
  
Article 9.8  
Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment 
 1.  Each Party shall accord to:   
 
(a)  investors and investments of investors of the other Party in established financial service suppliers, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors and investments of investors of a non- party in established financial service suppliers;  
 (b)  established financial service suppliers of the other Party, treatment no less favourable than  that it accords, in like circumstances, to 
established financial service suppliers of a non -party; 
 (c)  financial services or cross- border financial service suppliers of the 
other Party, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like9 - 11 
 
 circumst ances, to financial services and cross -border financial service 
suppliers of a non- party .6 
 
2.  For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not encompass international dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms.  
 
 
Article 9. 9 
Senior Management and Boards of Directors  
 1.  Neither Party shall require established financial service suppliers of the other Party, to engage natural persons of any particular nationality as members of the board of directors, senior managerial or other essential personnel.   
 2.  Neither Party shall require that more than a minority of the board of directors of established financial service suppliers of the other Party be composed of persons residing in the territory of the Party. 
  
Article 9. 10 
Non-Conforming Measures  
 1.  Article 9.5 (National Treatment), Article 9.6 (Market Access),  Article 9.7 
(Local Presence), Article 9.8 ( Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment ) and Article 
9.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do not apply to: 
 
(a)  any existing non- conforming measure that is maintained by a Party 
at:  
 
(i)  the central level of government, as set out in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III (Schedules of Non -Conforming 
Measure s for Financial Services) ; 
 (ii)  a regional level of government, as set out in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III (Schedules of Non -Conforming 
Measure s for Financial Services) ; or 
 
(iii)  a local level of government; 
 
(b)  the continuation or prompt renewal of any non- conforming measure 
referred to in subparagraph (a);  
 
                                                            
6 For greater certainty, this paragraph does not cover treatment accorded by the United Kingdom to 
investors and investments of investors in established financial services suppliers, established financial service suppliers, financial services or cross -border financial service suppliers of territories 
for whose international relations the United Kingdom is resp onsible.9 - 12 
 
 (c)  an amendment to any non- conforming measure referred to in 
subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease 
the conformity of the me asure, as it existed  immediately before the 
amendment, with Article 9.5 (National Treatment), Article 9.6 (Market Access), Article 9. 7 (Local Presence), Article 9.8 ( Most -
Favoured- Nation Treatment ), or Article 9.9 (Senior Management and 
Boards of Directors); or  
 (d)  any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out in Section B of its Schedule to 
Annex III (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measure for Financia l 
Services) . 
 2.  Neither Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule, require an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.   
 3.  Where Article 8.3 (National Treatment – Cross -Border Trade in Services), 
Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured- Nation Treatment – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services) , Article 8.5 (Market Access – Cross -Border Trade in Services ), 
Article 8.6 (Local Presence – Cross -Border Trade in Services ), Article 13.4 
(Market Access – Investment), Article 13.5 (National Treatment - 
Investment), Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment –  Investment),  
or Article 13.12 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors - Investment)   
do not apply to a measure due to that measure being: 
 
(a)  set out by a Party as a non- conforming measure in its Schedule to 
Annex I (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment) ; or  
 (b)  a measure which a Party may adopt or maintain under an entry set out by a Party in its Schedule to Annex II ( Schedules of Non-Conforming 
Measures for Services and Investment), 
 
that measure shall be treated as a non -conforming measure not subject to 
Article 9.5 (National Treatment), Article 9.6 (Market Access),  Article 9.7 
(Local Presence),  Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment ), or Article 
9.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors), as the case may be, to the 
extent that the measure is covered by this Chapter.  
 4.  Article 9.5 (National Treatment) and Article 9. 8 (Most -Favoured-Nation 
Treatment ) shall not apply to any measure that falls within Article 5 of the 
TRIPS Agreement, and any measure that is covered by an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations imposed by Article 15.8 (National 
Treatment  – Intellectual Property ), or by Article 3 or Article 4 of the TRIPS 
Agreement.9 - 13 
 
 Article 9.11 
Transparency  
 
1.  Articles 26.2 (General Provision s –  Good Regulatory Practice), 26.6 (Public 
Consultation – Good Regulatory Practice), 26.10 (Regulatory Cooperation –  
Good Regulatory Practice) , and 26.11 ( Contact Points  – Good Regulatory 
Practice) and Articles 28.2 (Publication – Transparency  and Anti -
Corruption) , 28.3 (Administrative Proceedings – Transparency  and Anti -
Corruption),  and 28.5 (Provision of Information – Transparency  and Anti -
Corruption)  do not apply to a measure covered by this Chapter.  
 2.  The Parties recognise that transparent measures governing the activities of financial service suppliers are important in facilitating their ability to gain access to and operate in each other’s markets. Each Party commits to promote 
regulatory transparency in financial services.  
 3.  Each Party shall:  
 
(a)  ensure that all measures of general application to which this Chapter applies are administered in a reasonab le, objective, and impartial 
manner;  
 (b)  ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general application to which this Chapter applies are promptly published or made available in a manner that enables an 
interested perso n and the other Party to become acquainted with them;  
 (c)  to the extent practicable, ensure advance publication of any law s, 
regulations, procedures , and administrative rulings of general 
application to which this Chapter applies that it proposes to adopt  and 
their purpose, and provide an interested person and the other Party a 
reasonable opportunity to comment on them ;  
 (d)  maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms to respond, within a reasonable period of time, to an inquiry or a request for information from an interested person and the other Party regarding measures of general application to which this Chapter applies;  
 (e)  allow, to the extent practicable, a reasonable period of time between the publication of a final law or regulation of general application to which this Chapter applies and the date when it enters into effect; and  
 (f)  ensure that the rules of general application adopted or maintained by a self -regulatory organisation of the Party, to which this Chapter 
applies, are promptly published or otherwise made available in a manner that enables interested persons to become acquainted with them.9 - 14 
 
 4.  In developing a new law or regulation of general application to which this 
Chapter applies, a Party may consider, in a manner consistent with its law 
and regulations, comments regarding how the proposed law or regulation of general application may affect the operations of financial service supplier s, 
including financial service suppliers of the Party or the other Party. These comments may include: 
 
(a)  submissions to a Party by the other Party regarding its regulatory measures that are related to the objectives of the proposed law or regulation of general application; or  
 (b)  submissions to a Party by interested persons, including the other Party or financial service suppliers of the other Party, with regard to the potential effects of the proposed law or regulation of general application.  
 5.  Before the competent authority of a Party adopts a final law or regulation of general application, a Party shall, to the extent practicable, address in writing the substantive comments received from interested persons with respect to the proposed law or regulation of general application.
7  
 6.  If a Party adopts or maintains measures relating to authorisation for the supply of a service, the Party shall ensure that: 
 
(a)  the competent authority reaches and admi nisters its decisions in a 
manner independent from any supplier of the services for which authorisation is required ;
8   
 (b)  those measures are based on objective and transparent criteria;
9  
 (c)  the procedures are impartial, and that the procedures are adequate for applicants to demonstrate whether they meet the requirements, if those requirements exist;  
 (d)  the procedures do not in themselves unjustifiably prevent fulfilment of requirements; a nd 
 (e)  those measures do not discriminate on the basis of gender .
10 
 
                                                            
7 For greater certainty, a Party may address those comments collectively on an official website.  
8For greater certainty, this provision does not mandate a particular administrative structure; it refers 
to the decision -making process and administering of decisions.  
9 Those criteria may include  competence and the ability to supply a service, including to do so in a 
manner consistent with a Party’s regulatory requirements. Competent authorities may assess the 
weight to be given to each crite rion. 
10 Differential treatment that is reasonable and objective, and aims to achieve a legitimate purpose, 
and adoption by Parties of temporary special measures aimed at accelerating de facto  equality across 
all genders, shall not be considered discrimination for the purposes of this provision.9 - 15 
 
 7.  If a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a financial service, the 
competent authorities of the Party shall:  
 
(a)  make publicly available the information necessary for financial 
service suppliers to comply with the requirements and procedures for obtaining, maintaining, amending, and renewing that  authorisation.  
 Where it exists, that information shall include: 
 
(i)  fees;  
 (ii)  contact information of competent authorities; 
 (iii)  procedures for appeal or review of decisions concerning applications;  
 (iv)  procedures for monitoring or enforcing compliance with the terms and conditions of licences; 
 (v)  opportunities for public involvement, such as through heari ngs 
or comments;  
 (vi)  indicative timeframes for processing of an application; and 
 (vii)  any other relevant requirements and procedures; 
 
(b)  avoid, to the extent practicable, requiring an applicant to approach more than one competent authority for each application for authorisation. If a service is within the jurisdiction of multiple 
competent authorities, multiple applications for authorisation may be required; 
 (c)  permit, to the extent practicable, submission of an application at any time throughout the year .
11  If a specific time period for applying 
exists, the Party shall ensure that the regulatory authorities allow a reasonable period for the submission of an application; 
 (d)  taking into account their competing priorities and resource constraints, endeavour to accept applications in electronic format;  
 (e)  accept copies of documents, that are authenticated in accordance with the Party’s law s and regulations, in place of original documents, 
unless the competent authorities require original documents to protect the integrity of the authorisation process; 
 
                                                            
11 Competent authorities are not required to start considering applications outside of their official 
working hours and working days.9 - 16 
 
 (f)  ensure that the authorisation fees charged by its competent authorities 
are reasonabl e, transparent and do not in themselves restrict the 
supply of the relevant service;  
 
(g)  make an administrative decision on a complete application of a financial service supplier of the other Party, relating to the supply of a financial service within a  reasonable period of time, in line with each 
Party’s law.  An application is not considered complete until the 
competent authority has received all necessary information and all relevant hearings, if any, have been held;  
 (h)  on request of an applicant, inform the applicant of the status of their 
application without undue delay;  
 (i)  if they require additional information from the applicant, notify the applicant without undue delay;
12 
 (j)  promptly notify the applicant of the outcome of their application ,
13 to 
the extent possible, in writing;14 
 (k)  before rejecting an application for authorisation, notify the applicant with the relevant reasons and give the applicant the opportunity to make representations in support of the application;  
 (l)  on request of an unsuccessful applicant, to the extent possible, inform the applicant of the reasons for denial of the application and, if applicable, the procedures for resubmission of an application. An applicant should not be prevented from submitting a nother 
application
15 solely on the basis that an application had been 
previously rejected; and 
 (m)  ensure that authorisation, once granted, enters into effect without undue delay, subject to the applicable terms and conditions.
16 
  
    
                                                            
12 Competent authorities are not required to provide an extension of the deadline where an applicant 
is provided with the opportunity to provide additional information.   
13 Competent authorities may meet this requirement by informing an applicant in advance in writing, 
including through a published measure, that lack of response after a specified period of time from the date of submission of an application indicates acceptance of the application or rejection of the 
application.  
14 "In writing" may include in electronic form.  
15 Competent authorities may require that the content of that applic ation has been revised.  
16 Competent authorities are not responsible for delays due to reasons outside their competence.9 - 17 
 
  
Article 9.1 2 
Financial Data and Information17  
 
1.  The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements concerning the transfer of information by electronic means and the use of financial service computing facilities, including requirements that seek to ensure the security and confidentiality of communications. 
 2.  Neither Party shall prohibit or restrict a financial service supplier of the other Party from transferring , including by electronic means, information including 
personal informati on, where those transfers  are necessary for the conduct of 
the ordinary business of the financial service supplier. 
 3.  Subject to paragraphs 4 and 5, i t is prohibited for a Party to require, as a 
condition for conducting business in the Party’s territory, a financial service supplier of the other Party to use or locate financial service computing facilities, in the former Party’s territory .
18 
 4.  Each Party has the right to require a financial service supplier of the other 
Party to use or locate financial service computing facilities in the former Party’s territory, where it is not able to ensure appropriate
19 access to 
information required for the purposes of financial regulation and supervision, provided that the following conditions are met:  
 
(a)  to the extent practicable, the Party provides a financial service supplier of the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to remediate any lack of access to information; and  
 (b)  the Party or its regulatory authorities inform the other Party or its regulatory authorities before imposing any requirements to a financial service supplier of the other Party to use or locate financial service computing facilities in the former Party’s territory.  
 5.  Nothing shall restrict the right of a Party to adopt or maintain measures inconsistent with paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 to achieve a legitimate public 
policy objective such as  the protection of personal information, personal 
                                                            
17 For Australia, Article 9.12 (Financial Data and Information) does not apply to Australia’s Foreign 
Investment Framework, which comprises Australia’s Foreign Investment Policy, Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act 1975 (Cth) , Foreign Acquisitions and Tak eovers Regulation 2015 
(Cth) , Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Fees Imposition Act 2015 (Cth) , Foreign Acquisitions and 
Takeovers Fees Imposition Regulation s 2020  (Cth) , Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998 (Cth)  
and Ministerial Statements.  
18 For gr eater certainty, this prohibition also applies to circumstances in which a financial service 
supplier of the other Party uses the services of an external business for such use, storage or processing of information.    
19 For greater certainty, “appropriate” access may include sufficient, direct, regular or timely access 
that is provided without undue delay .9 - 18 
 
 privacy, and the confidentiality of individual records and accounts, provided 
that the measure:  
(a)  is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade; and   
 (b)  does not impose restrictions on transfers of information or on the use or location of computing facilities greater than are required to achieve the objective.  
 7.  This Article does not apply to information held or processed by or on behalf 
of a Party, or measures related to that information, including measures related 
to its collection.  
 8.  This Article does not apply to credit information, or related personal information, of a natural person. 
  
Article 9.1 3 
Payment and Clearing  
 
Under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party 
shall grant to established financial service suppliers of the other Party in the Party’s territory access to payment and clearing systems operated by public entities, and to official fun ding and refinancing facilities available in the 
normal course of ordinary business. This Article is not intended to confer access to the Party’s lender of last resort facilities.  
 
 
Article 9.1 4 
Performance of Back -Office Functions  
 1.  Each Party recogn ises that the performance of the back -office functions of 
an established financial service supplier in its territory by the head office or an affiliate of the established financial service supplier, or by an unrelated service supplier, either inside or out side its territory, is important to the 
effective management and efficient operation of that established financial service supplier.  Subject to paragraph 3, to the extent practicable, each Party 
shall allow the performance of those functions by the head of fice or affiliate 
of an established financial service supplier in its territory or by an unrelated service supplier .  
 2.  While a Party may require established financial service suppliers to ensure compliance with any domestic requirements applicable to t hose functions, 
they recognise the importance of avoiding the imposition of arbitrary requirements on the performance of those functions.9 - 19 
 
 3.  For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 prevents a Party from requiring 
an established financial service supplier in its territory to retain certain functions.  
 
Article 9.1 5 
Self-Regulatory Organisations 
 
If a Party requires a financial service supplier of the other Party  to be 
a member of, participate in, or have access to, a self -regulatory organisation 
to supply a financial service in or into the territory of that Party , or when the 
Party provides, directly or indirectly, privileges or advantages to financial service suppliers supplying financial services through a self -regulatory 
organisation, then the requiring Party shall ensure that the self -regulatory 
organisation observes the obligations contained in Article 9.5 (National 
Treatment)  and Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment) .   
  
Article 9.1 6 
Electronic Payments  
 1.  Noting the rapid growth of electronic payments, in particular, those provided by non- banks and FinTech enterprises, the Parties shall endeavour to support, 
subject to maintaining resilience, the development of efficient, safe, and 
secure cross -border electronic payments by:  
 
(a)  fostering the adoption and use of internationally accepted standards for electronic payments;    
 (b)  promoting interoperability and the interlinking of electronic payment 
infrastructures; and   
 (c)  encouraging innovation and competition in electronic payments.  
 2.  To this end, each Party shall , subject to maintaining resilience , endeavour to:  
 
(a)  for the electronic payment systems solely operated by a Party, 
publicly disclose objective and risk‐based criteria for participation which permit fair and open access;  
 (b)  not require all payment card transactions to be routed through a national or single electronic payment gateway; 
 (c)  adopt, for relevant electronic payment systems, international standards for electronic payment messaging for electronic data 
exchange between payment service providers and services suppliers to enable greater interoperability between electronic payment systems;9 - 20 
 
 (d)  facilitate the use of open platforms and architectures and encourage 
payment service providers to safely and securely make available new technologies and standards for their financial products and services to third parties , where possible , to facilitate greater interoperability and 
innovation in electronic payments; and 
 (e)  facilitate innovation and competition and the introduction of new 
financial and electronic payment products and services in a timely manner such as through adopting regulatory and industry sandboxes and cooperation at international fora.  
 3.  In view of paragraph 1,  the Parties recognise the importance of upholding 
safety, efficiency, trust and security in electronic payment systems through regulations, and that the adoption and enforcement of regulations and policies should be proportionate to the risks undertaken by the payment  service 
providers.  
 
 
Article 9.1 7 
Financial Services New to the Territory of a Party  
 1.  Each Party shall permit financial service suppliers of the other Party to supply a new financial service that the first Party would permit its own financial service suppliers  to supply, in like circumstances , without adopting a law or 
modifying an existing law .
20 For cross- border financial service suppliers, 
this Article only applies to the financial services specified in Annex 9A (Cross -Border Trade in Financial Services) . 
 2.  Notwithstanding subparagraph 1(e) of Article 9.6 (Market Access) , a Party 
may determine the institutional and juridical form through which the new financial service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the service. Where that  authorisation is required, a decision shall 
be made within a reasonab le time, and the authorisation may only be refused 
for prudential reasons.  
  
Article 9.1 8 
Financial Services New to the Territories of b oth Parties  
 1.  Subject to paragraph 2, each Party may permit financial service suppliers of the other Party to supply a financial service new to the territories of both Parties. For cross- border financial service suppliers, this article only applies 
to the financial serv ices specified in Annex 9A (Cross -Border Trade in 
Financial Services). 
 
                                                            
20 For greater certainty, a Party may issue a new regulation or other subordinate measure in permitting 
the supply of the new financial service.9 - 21 
 
 2.  Notwithstanding subparagraph 1(e) of Article 9.6 (Market Access) , a Party 
may determine the institutional and juridical form through which that 
financial service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the service. 
3.  For the purposes of this Article , a financial service new to the territory of both  
Parties is a financial service, including services related to existing and new 
products or the  manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied 
in a Party’s territory.  
  
Article 9. 19 
Sustainable Finance  
 1.  The Parties recognise the importance of international cooperation to facilitate the inclusion of environmental, social, and governance considerations in investment decision- making and other business activities, in order, thereby, 
to increase investment in sustainable activities.  
 2.  The inclusion of environmental considerations in investment decision-making and other business activities involves, inter alia, the assessment and pricing of climate -related risks and opportunities, and the exploration of 
environmental and sustainable proj ects and infrastructure.  
 3.  The Parties acknowledge the importance of encouraging financial service suppliers to develop an approach to managing climate -related financial risks.  
Specifically, the Parties recognise the importance of encouraging the uptak e 
of climate -related financial disclosures for financial service suppliers with 
material exposure to climate change, including forward -looking information, 
informed by initiatives in international fora, such as the Task Force on Climate -Related Financial Disclosures.  
 4.  The Parties shall cooperate in relevant international fora, and where agreeable, in the development and adoption of internationally recognised standards for the inclusion of environmental, social, and governance considerations in investment decision -making and other business activities. 
  
Article 9.2 0 
Recognition of Prudential Measures 
 1.  A Party may recognise a prudential measure of a non -party in the application 
of a measure covered by this Chapter .
21 That recognition may be: 
 
(a)  accorded autonomously;  
 (b)  achieved through harmonisation or other means; or 
                                                            
21 For greater certainty, nothing in Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment)  shall be construed 
to require a Party to accord recognition to prudential measures of the other Party.9 - 22 
 
  
(c)  based upon an agreement or arrangement with the non-party.  
 2.  A Party that accords recognition of a prudential measure under paragraph 1 to a non-party, shall provide adequate opportunity to the other Party to demonstrate that circumstances exist in which there are or would be equivalent regulation, oversight, implementation of regulation and, if appropriate, procedures concerning the sharing of information between the Parties.  
 3.  If a Party accords recognition of a prudential measure under paragraph 1(c) and the circumstances set out in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide adequate opportunity to the other Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement.  
  
Article 9.2 1 
Institutional Provisions   
 1.  The Committee  on Services and Investment  established pursuant to Article 
8.13 ( Committee on Services and Investment - Cross -Border Trade in 
Services)  shall be responsible for the effective implementation and operation 
of this Chapter.  
 2.  T he authorities responsible for financial services for each Party  are set out in 
Annex 9B (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) . 
  
Article 9.22 
Consultations  
 1.  A Party may request, in writing, consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising under this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall give sympathetic consideration to the request to hold consultat ions. The Parties shall report the results of their cons ultations to the 
Committee  on Services and Investment .  
 2.  With regard to matters relating to existing non -conforming measures 
maintained by a Party at a regional level of government as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(ii) of Article 9.10 (Non- Conforming Measures):  
 
(a)  a Party may request information on any non- conforming measure at 
the regional level of government of the other Party. Each Party’s authorities responsible for financial services as specified in Annex 9B 
(Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) shall establish a 
contact point to respond to those requests and to facilitate the9 - 23 
 
 exchange of information regarding the operation of measures covered 
by those requests; and  
 (b)  if a Party considers that a non -conforming measure applied by a 
regional level o f government of the other Party creates a material 
impediment to trade or investment by an established financial service supplier, an investor, investments in an established financial service supplier or a cross -border financial service supplier, the Party  may 
request consultations with regard to that measure. The Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging information on the operation of the measure and considering whether further steps are necessary and appropriate.  
 3.  Each Party sh all ensure that when there are consultations pursuant to 
paragraphs 1 and 2, its delegation includes officials with the relevant expertise in the area covered by this Chapter from the authorities responsible for financial services as specified in Annex 9B  (Authorities Responsible for 
Financial Services).  
 4.  For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a Party to derogate from its law regarding sharing of information between regulatory authorities, or the requirements of an agreement or arrangement between financial authorities of the Parties, or to require a regulatory authority to take any action that would interfere with specific regulatory, supervisory, administrative or enforcement matters.  
  
Article 9.23 
Dispute Settlem ent  
 1.  Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement)  applies as modified by this Article to the 
settlement of disputes arising under this Chapter.  
 2.  The Parties shall ensure for disputes arising under this Chapter that in addition to the requirements set out in subparagraph 1(a) of Article 30.10 
(Qualifications of Panellists –  Dispute Settlement)  all panellists appointed 
in disputes arising under this Chapter shall have the necessary expertise relevant to financial services, which may include the regulation of financial service suppliers.  
 3.  If the Director- General of the WTO or the Secretary General of the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration is responsible for appointing a panellist pursuant to pa ragraph 7  or paragraph 8  of Article 30 .9 (Establishment and 
Reconvening of Panels – Dispute Settlement ), the Parties shall request that 
the appointing authority appoint a panellist who meets the requirements set out in paragraph 2.9 - 24 
 
 4.  Further to  paragraph 5 of Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non-
Compliance – Dispute Settlement) , in considering what obligations to 
suspend the complaining Party shall apply the following principles. If the 
measure affects:  
 
(a)  the financial services sector and any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend obligations in the financial services sector that do not exceed a level equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment in the complaining Party’s financial services sector; or  
 (b)  only a sector other than the financial services sector, the complaining Party shall not suspend obligations in the financial services sector.  
  
Article 9.24 
Financial Services Regulatory Cooperation 
 
The Parties shall promote and seek to further develop regulatory 
cooperation in financial services in accordance with Annex 9C  (Financial 
Services Regulatory  Cooperation).9A - 1 
 ANNEX 9A  
Cross- Border Trade in Financial Services  
 
Australia  
Insurance and insurance- related services  
1.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in Australia’s commitments,  
Articles 9.5 (National Treatment),  9.6 (Market Access) and 9.7 (Local 
Presence)  apply to the cross -border supply or trade in financial services, as 
defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border supply of 
financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a)  insurance of risks relating to:  
(i)  maritim e shipping and commercial aviation and space 
launching and freight (including satellites), with such 
insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being 
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods and any 
liability arising therefrom;  
(ii)  goods in international transit; 
(iii)  credit and suretyship;  
(iv)  land vehicles; 
(v)  fire and natural forces;  
(vi)  other damage to property; 
(vii)  motor vehicle liability, except in relation to any liability 
which, in accordance with domestic law, must be insured by 
an insurer who is authorised under such laws; 
(viii)  general liability;  
(ix)  miscellaneous financial loss;  
(x)  difference in conditions and difference in limits, where the difference in conditions or difference in limits cover is provide d under a master policy issued by an insurer to cover 
risks across multiple jurisdictions;  
(b)  reinsurance and retrocession;  
(c)  insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of financial ser vice in Article 
9.1 (Definitions), of insurance risks related to the services listed in 
subparagraphs (a) and (b); and9A - 2 
 (d)  services auxiliary to insurance as described in subparagraph (d) of the 
definition of financial service in Article 9.1 (Definitions).  
2.  Paragraph 1 does not permit suppliers of the services listed in subparagraphs 1(a)(iii) through (x) to provide these  services to a retail client.  
3.  For the purposes of the commitments made in subparagraphs 1(a)(iii)  
through(x), for Australia, “retail client” means: 
  (a)  a natural person; or  
(b)  a small business as defined under section 761G(12) of the 
Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) .  
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)  
4.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in Australia’s commitments,
 
Articles 9.5 (National Treatment), 9.6 (Market Access) and 9.7 (Local 
Presence) apply to the cross- border supply or trade in financial services, as 
defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border supply of 
financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a)  the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data 
processing and related software, as described in subparagraph (o) of 
the definition of banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions);  
(b)  advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other financial services, as described in subparagraph (p) of the definition of banking and other financial services (excludin g 
insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions), but not intermediation as 
described in that subparagraph; 
(c)  securities related transactions on a wholesale basis between and among financial institutions and other entities; and 
(d)  portfolio management servic es by a financial service supplier  of the 
United Kingdom to:  
(i)  a collective investment vehicle or management company of such a vehicle;  
(ii)  insurance companies; and  
(iii)  pension funds and management companies of such funds.  
5.  For the purposes of the commitment made in paragraph 4(d), for Australia:9A - 3 
 (a)  collective investment scheme22 means a “managed investment 
scheme” as defined under Section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001 
(Cth) , other than a managed investment scheme operated in 
contravention of Subsection 601ED (5) of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) , or an entity that: 
(i)  carries on a business of investment in securities, interests in 
land, or other investments; and 
(ii)  in the course of carrying on that business, invests funds 
subscribed, whether directly or indirectly, after an offer or invitation to the public (within the meaning of Section 82 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) ) made on terms that the funds 
subscribed w ould be invested; 
 
(b)  portfolio management services to a collective investment scheme 
located in the Area of Australia, exclude:  
(i)  custodial services23 and execution services that are not related 
to managing a collective investment scheme; and  
(ii)  trustee services. 
6.  For greater certainty, p aragraph 4 does not permit suppliers of the services 
listed in subparagraphs 4(d)(i) through ( iii) to provide these services  to a retail 
client.  
7.  For the purposes of the  commitments made  in paragraph 4(d)(i) through (iii), 
for Australia, “retail client” means a person who is defined as a retail client under section 761G of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)  and is not excluded 
from being a retail client under section 761GA of the Corporations Act 2001 
(Cth) . 
 
                                                            
22 For greater certainty, a Party may require a collective investment sch eme or a person of a Party 
involved in the operation of the scheme located in the Party’s territory to retain ultimate 
responsibility for the management of the collective investment scheme.  
23 Custodial services are included in paragraph (d) only with respect to investments for which the 
primary market is outside of the territory of Australia.9A - 4 
 United Kingdom  
Insurance and insurance- related services  
1.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in the United Kingdom’s  
commitments,  Articles 9.5 (National Treatment), 9.6 (Market Access) and 
9.7 (Local Presence)  apply to the cross- border supply or trade in financial 
services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border 
supply of financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a)  insurance of risks relating to :24 
 
(i)  maritime shipping a nd commercial aviation and space 
launching and freight (including satellites), with such 
insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods and any liability arising therefrom;  
 (ii)  goods in in ternational transit;  
 (iii)  credit and suretyship;  
 
(iv)  land vehicles; 
 
(v)  fire and natural forces;  
 (vi)  other damage to property; 
 (vii)  motor vehicle liability, except in relation to any liability which, in accordance with domestic law, must be insured by an insurer who is authorised under such laws; 
 
(viii)  general liability;  
 
(ix)  miscellaneous financial loss;  
 (x)  difference in conditions and difference in limits, where the 
difference in conditions or difference in limits cover is 
provided under a master policy issued by an insurer to cover 
risks across multiple jurisdictions;  
 
(b)  reinsurance and retrocession;  
                                                            
24For greater certainty, insurance activities in the categories mentioned in subparagraphs 1(a)(iii)  
through (x) are included in the scope of the commitments only where a supplier is carrying on that 
insurance business entirely outside that Party’s territory.9A - 5 
  
(c)  insurance intermediation , such as brokerage and agency, as referred 
to in subparagraph ( c) of the definition of financial service in Article 
9.1 (Definitions), of insurance risks related to the services listed in 
subparagraphs (a) and (b); and 
 
(d)  services auxiliary to insurance as described in subparagraph ( d) of the 
definition of financial service in Article 9.1 (Definitions).  
 
2.  Paragraph 1 does not permit suppliers of the services listed in subparagraphs 
1(a)(iii) through (x) to provide these  services to a retail client.  
3.  In this Annex, for the United Kingdom, “retail client” means: 
(a)  a natural person; or  
(b)  an enterprise which satisfies two or more of the requirements 
specified in section 465(3) of the Companies Act 2006.  
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) 
4.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in the United Kingdom’s 
commitments,  Articles 9.5 (National Treatment), 9.6 (Market Access) and 
9.7 (Local Presence)  apply to the cross -border supply or trade in financial 
services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border 
supply of financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a) the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data 
processing and related software, as described in subparagraph ( o) of 
the definition of banking and other financial services (excluding 
insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions);  
 (b)  advisory and other auxiliary financial service s relating to banking and 
other financial services, as described in subparagraph ( p) of the 
definition of banking and other financial services (excluding 
insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions), but not intermediation as 
described in that subparagraph; and 
(c)  portfolio management services by a financial service supplier of Australia to:  
(i) a collective investment vehicle or management company of such a vehicle;  
(ii) insurance companies; and  
(iii) pension funds and management companies of such funds.  
5.  For the purposes of the commitment made in paragraph 4 (c), for the United 
Kingdom :  
(a) a collective investment vehicle means:9A - 6 
 (i)  a collective investment scheme as defined in section 235 of 
the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000; or  
(ii)  an alternative investment fund as defined in regulation 3 of the 
Alternative Investment Fund Managers Regulations 2013;   
(b)  portfolio management means managing portfolios in accordance with 
mandates given by clients on a discretionary client -by-client b asis 
where such portfolios include one or more financial instruments; and 
 
(c)  portfolio management services do not include:  
(i)  custodial services;  
(ii)  trustee services; or  
(iii)  execution services.9B - 1 
 ANNEX 9B  
 
 
Authorities Responsible for Financial Services  
  
The authorities responsible for financial services for each Party are:  
 
(a)  for Australia, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade or its successor and the Department of the Treasury  or its successor ; and 
 (b)  for the United Kingdom, H er M ajesty’s  Treasury or its successor.9C - 1 
 ANNEX 9 C 
 
Financial Services Regulatory Cooperation 
 
 
Article 9C.1 
Objectives of Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  The Parties recognise that promoting cooperation between the Parties and their financial regulatory authorities  supports several  objectives including: 
 
(a)  enhancing financial services trade and investment between the 
Parties; 
 (b)  strengthening  financial systems and  promoting financial stability;  
 (c)  improving market integrity and  countering undesirable market 
fragmentation; 
 (d)  promoting fair and competitive markets;  
 (e)  promoting robust and efficient  financial service suppliers, markets, 
and infrastructure;  
 (f)  protecting  consumers, investors, depositors,  policy holders and 
persons to whom a fiduciary and / or statutory duty is owed by a 
financial service su pplier; and 
 (g)  providing a transparent and predictable environment for financial 
service suppliers . 
 2.  The Parties shall  wherever practicable work together bilaterally and in 
international bodies to achieve the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 (hereinafter referred to in this Annex as “regulatory  cooperation”). 
 3.  The Parties shall , wherever practicable , base their regulatory cooperation on 
the principles and prudential standards agreed at the international level where  
applicable
25 and follow the principles  set out in Article 9C.3 (Principles of 
Regulatory Cooperation), as implemented in the framework developed in 
accordance with  Article 9C.5 (Framework for Regulatory Cooperation). 
 4.  This Annex is without prejudice to the right of a Party to determine its own appropriate level of prudential regulation, including the establishment  and 
enforcement  of measures that provide a higher level of prudential protection 
than those set out in internationally agreed standards. 
                                                            
25 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Annex,  standards adopted by international standard -
setting bodies to which both Parties' relevant competent authorities have agreed and in which both 
Parties participate may be considered as internationally agreed standards.9C - 2 
  
 
Article 9C.2  
Scope of Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  Regulatory cooperation between the Parties shall cover all areas of financial services, as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions), unless the Parties agree otherwise.  
 2.  Article 26.2 (General Provision – Good Regulatory Practice), Article 26.6 
(Public Consultation –  Good Regulatory Practice), Article 26.10 (Regulatory 
Cooperation – Good Regulatory Practice) and Article 26.11 ( Contact Points  
– Good Regulatory Practice ) do not apply to any matter covered by this 
Annex. 
 3.  The provisions of this Annex shall be without prejudice to the distribution and exercise of the duties of the regulatory and supervisory authorities of the Parties, in line with their statutory objectives. The Parties recognise that their regulatory cooper ation in financial services should be based on due 
consideration of each Party’s legislative and regulatory autonomy and 
differences in legislative and regulatory frameworks, market  structures and 
in the range of business models that may exist between the Parties.  
  
Article 9C.3 
Principles of Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  Mutual Compatibility of Regulatory and Supervisory Frameworks   
(a)  The Parties shall, wherever practicable, work to achieve mutual compatibility of their respective regulatory and supervisory frameworks for financial services in areas of common interest in a way that supports the objectives set out in Article 9C.1 (Objectives of 
Regulatory Cooperation). That work may include developing 
consistent regulatory approaches on an outcomes basis and reducing unnecessarily burdensome, duplicative or divergent regulatory requirements.  
 (b)  As the basis for pursuing the mutual com patibility referred to in 
subparagraph (a), each Party shall use its best endeavours to ensure that internationally agreed standards for regulation and supervision in the area of financial services are implemented and applied in its territory.  
 (c)  To su pport regulatory cooperation, the Parties shall, wherever 
practicable, work together in international standard -setting bodies to 
develop effective international standards and facilitate coherent implementation.9C - 3 
  
2.  Regulatory Deference   
 
The Parties shall, wherever  agreeable and in accordance with their respective 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks, defer to the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the other Party. The foregoing shall be without prejudice to each Party’s legislative and regulatory autonomy and right to assess, on the basis of its own frameworks, the frameworks of the other Party, including the effective enforcement of those frameworks, with a view to 
establishing deference. For the purposes of any such assessment, a Party  shall 
not require that the other Party’s regulatory and supervisory frameworks are identical to its own frameworks but shall base its assessment on regulatory outcomes. 
 3.  Sharing of Information    
(a)  Without prejudice to its own domestic processes, e ach Party shall use 
its best endeavours to inform the other Party and provide the other Party with adequate opportunity for comment when it consults on new regulatory initiatives , proposed measures or actual measures in the 
area of financial services that may be of relevance to that other Party.  
 (b) In the areas where one of the Parties defers to the regulatory and supervisory framework of the other Party, the Parties shall keep each other informed of how they provide for effective implementation and enforcement of regulatory and supervisory frameworks, consult on 
changes to the regulatory or supervisory framework, and ensure appropriate mechanisms are in place for the ongoing exchange of information on supervision and enforcement.  
 (c)  If a Party conclu des negotiations for an agreement or arrangement as 
described in Article 9.20 (Recognition of Prudential Measures) with 
a non-party, the Party shall directly notify the other Party to this Agreement and, upon conclusion of the aforementioned negotiations, provide adequate opportunity to that Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement or to negotiate a comparable agreement 
or arrangement.  
 4.  Review of Impact   
 
(a)  A Party shall, in the process of formulating its planned regulatory or supervisory initiatives, in the areas of financial services where that Party defers to the regulatory and supervisory framework of the other Party, give due consideration to the impact of those initiatives on its decision to defer to the other Party's regulatory and supervisory frameworks.9C - 4 
 (b)  Each Party shall review a measure which has been brought to its 
attention by a specific written request of the other Party which 
identifies the measure as having an impact on the ability of the other Party’s financial service suppliers to provide financial services within the first Party’s territory. Any requests for review shall only be mad e 
where the impact is material and shall include a clear explanation of the impact of the measure and its materiality. Any review shall consider whether and to what extent the measure may be rendered mutually compatible.  
 (c)  The Party shall respond to the request in writing, and within a reasonable period of time.   
  
Article 9C.4 
Joint Financial Regulatory Forum 
 1.  The Parties hereby establish a Joint Financial Regulatory Forum (hereinafter referred to in this Annex as the “Forum”).     
 2.  The Forum shall serve as a platform to facilitate regulatory cooperation between the Parties so as to achieve the objectives set out in Article 9C.1 
(Objectives of Regulatory Cooperation) . The Forum shall observe the 
principles of regulatory cooperation laid out in Article 9C.3 (Principles of 
Regulatory Cooperation)  and implemented in the framework referred to in 
Article 9C.5 (Framework for Regulatory Cooperation). 
 3.  The meetings of the Forum shall be held  annually, unless the Parties agree 
otherwise, and whenever  the Parties consider it expedient or necessary  giving 
consideration to existing regulatory relationships and communications. 
 4.  The Forum shall be composed of representatives of Australia and the United 
Kingdom, including:  
 
(a)  for Australia, the Department of  the Treasury, Australian Prudential 
Regulation Authority, Australian Securities and Investments Commission and the Reserve Bank of Australia and other agencies as relevant to the matters under discussion, and any of their successors, which ha ve, at technical level, responsibility for financial services 
regulatory issues ; and  
 (b)  for the United Kingdom, Her Majesty’s Treasury, the Bank of 
England and the Financial Conduct Authority, and any of their successors which have, at technical level,  responsibility for financial 
services regulatory issues.    
 5.  Without prejudice to the right of each Party to decide on the composition of its representation in the Forum, each Party may request that the other Party9C - 5 
 invite representatives with relevant seniority or expertise from other financial 
regulatory or supervisory authorities.  This is with a view to contributing to 
the Forum's discussions and preparatory work in matters related to the 
activity of those financial regulatory or supervisory authorit ies, or the 
objectives of regulatory cooperation, as set out in Article 9C.1 (Objectives of 
Regulatory Cooperation) .  
 6.  The meetings of the Forum will be co -chaired by senior officials from the 
Department of  the Treasury  of Australia and Her Majesty’s Treasury of the 
United Kingdom, or their respective successors.   
 7.  Each co -chair shall designate a specific contact point to facilitate the work of 
the Forum.  
 8.  The Forum may establish expert sub -working groups to examine specific 
issues or explore cooperation in specific areas of financial services.  
  
Article 9C.5 
Framework for Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  The Forum shall develop a framework for improving regulatory cooperation.  
The framework will be guided by the principles set out in Article 9C.3 
(Principles of Regulatory Cooperation).  
 2.  The framework for regulatory cooperation shall include:  
(a)  without prejudice to each Party's own legislative and administrative processes, mechanisms for information exchange and consultation with the other Party, in appropriate forms giving consideration to existing communication processes;  
 (b)  guidelines to enhance regulatory cooperation between the Parties 
including guidelines for any expert sub- working groups established 
under paragraph 8 of Article 9C.4 (Joint Financial Regulatory 
Forum) .  These guidelines may cover different forms of regulatory 
cooperation, including deference to each other’s regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks or implementation of international standards  
in specific mutually agreed areas; 
 (c)  a procedure for reviewing the measures referred to in subparagraph 4(b) of Article 9C.3 (Principles of Regulatory Cooperation);  
 (d)  terms of reference and guidelines on the governance of the Forum; and  
 (e)  if so agreed, any other arrangements to enhance regulatory cooperation.9C - 6 
  
3.  The framework for regulatory cooperation may also envisage specific 
arrangements to facilitate cooperation in cross -border supervision and 
enforcement.  
  
Article 9C.6 
Mediation  
 1.  The Parties shall act in good faith to try to resolve any disputes arising under this Annex.  
 2.  The Parties shall make all  reasonable efforts to resolve any disputes arising 
under this Annex at working- level . 
  
Article 9C.7 
Termination of Deference 
 1.  A Party may rescind its decision to defer to the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the other Party in a specific area of financial services and revert to the application and enforcement of its own regulatory and supervisory frameworks in circumstances such as, but not exclusively, where:  
 
(a)  the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the other Party are no longer equivalent in outcome;  
 (b)  the other Party fails to enforce its regulatory and supervisory frameworks effectively; or  
 (c)  there is insufficient cooperation, including sharing of information, of the other Party in the areas set out under paragraph 3 of Article 9C.3 
(Principles of Regulatory Cooperation). 
 
2.  Prior to taking a decision to rescind pursuant to paragraph 1, a Party shall give written notification of its intention to rescind to the other Party.  Following receipt of the notification, the Parties shall consult with each other within a reasonable tim eframe which shall not exceed six months, and which 
may include mediation pursuant to Article 9C.6 (Mediation). 
 3.  Following publication of the decision by a Party to rescind deference, that Party shall accord the other Party a reasonable period of time prior to reverting to the application and enforcement of their own regulatory and supervisory frameworks, including sufficient time to: 
 
(a)  enable financial service suppliers to apply for, and have their application determined in respect of the necessary authorisations in the jurisdiction of the Party terminating deference; and9C - 7 
  
(b) pass provisions protecting the acquired rights of financial service suppliers that entered into force prior to the decision to rescind deference.  
  
Article 9C.8 
Emerging Issues  
 1.  To support innovation in the areas  of financial services, the Parties shall : 
 
(a)  endeavour to collaborate, share knowledge, experiences and developments in financial services and facilitate the cross-border development of new financial services; 
 (b)  promote and encourage cooperation relating to innovative financial 
services,
26 through their respective trade promotion agencies and 
regulators, and encourage  enterprises undertaking innovative 
financial services to use facilities and assistance available in the other 
Party’s territory  to explore new business opportunities; 
 (c)  encourage relevant  competent authorities to cooperate  in relevant 
international fora to improve opportunities for each Party’s  
enterprises  undertaking innovative financial services; 
 (d)  endeavour to cooperate on the development of regulation and 
standards for open banking; and 
 (e)  endeavour to cooperate on the development of underpinning technologies for innovative financial services . 
 
2.  The Parties may  share best practices to promote diversity27 in financial 
services and  recognise the importance of building a diverse, including 
gender- balanced, financial services industry, and the positive impact that 
diversity has on balanced decision -making, consumers, workplace culture, 
investment, and competitive markets. 
 
Article 9 C.9 
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Annex. 
 
                                                            
26 Innovative financial services includes FinTech and financial services -related RegTech activities 
which involve the improved use of tec hnology across financial services.  
27 Diversity includes gender, ethnicity, and professional and educational background.CHAPTER 10  
 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AND RECOGNITION OF PROFESSIONAL 
QUALIFICATIONS  
 
 
Article 10.1 
Definitions  
 
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:  
“legal arbitration, conciliation, and  mediation services” means the 
preparation of documents to be submitted to, the preparation for and appearance before, an arbitrator, conciliator, or mediator in any dispute involving the application and interpretation of law.
1  It does not include 
arbitra tion, conciliation, and mediation services in disputes not involving 
the application and interpretation of law which fall under services incidental to management consulting.  It also does not include acting as an arbitrator, conciliator, or mediator; and  
 “professional qualifications”  means qualifications attested by evidence of 
formal qualifications or professional experience and can include post -
academic training
2 or experience required for the right to practise.   
 
2. Definitions, included in Article 8.1  (Definitions - Cross -Border Trade in 
Services), are incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter to the extent that the relevant terms are used in this Chapter.  
  
Article 10.2  
Scope  
 1. This Chapter applies to measures of a Party affecting the supply of professional services, including by a covered investment.
3 
 2. Professional services include accountancy and auditing services, architectural services, engineering services, legal services, and other types of professional services.   
 3. This Chapter does not apply to the services or measures of a Party listed in 
                                                            
1 As a sub -category, international legal arbitration conciliation or mediation services refers to the same 
services w hen the dispute involves parties from two or more countries.  
2 Training means training resulting in a record, issued by a body whose ordinary activities include the 
issuing of those records, of having attained a particular standard.  
3 For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter affects the rights, obligations or reservations of each 
Party under other Chapters of this Agreement, including Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services), 
Chapter 9 (Financial Services), Chapter 11 (Temporary  Entry for Business Persons) and Chapter 13 
(Investment ).  paragraphs 3 through 5 of Article 8.2 (S cope - Cross -Border Trade in 
Services).  
 
 
Article 10. 3 
Objectives  
  The objectives of this Chapter are: 
 
(a) to encourage the development of systems for the recognition of professional qualifications and to better facilitate the international trade in professional services between the Parties;  
 (b) to facilitate the sharing of knowledge and expertise on professional services, accreditation, standards, and regulation between relevant bodies of the Parties in the development of best practice; and  
 (c) to encourage each Party to be at the forefront of the liberalisation of international trade in professional services.  
 
 
Article 10. 4  
General Principles for Professional Services  
 1. The Parties recognise that professional services play an essential role in facilitating trade and investment across both goods and services sectors and in promoting economic growth and bus iness confidence.  
 2. Each  Party shall consider, or encourage its relevant bodies to consider, 
subject to its laws and regulations, whether or in what manner to: 
 
(a)  apply ethical, conduct and disciplinary standards to professionals of the other Party in  a manner that is no more burdensome than the 
application of those standards on professionals of the Party in that professional services sub -sector;  
 (b) accommodate the provision of professional services, in the following 
ways:  
 
(i) on a temporary fly- in, fly -out basis; 
 
(ii) on a cross -border basis through the use of telecommunications 
technology; 
 (iii) by establishing a commercial presence; and  
 (iv) through a combination of fly- in, fly- out and one or both of the 
other modes listed  in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii);   
(c) permit service suppliers of each Party to work together;  
 
(d) permit enterprises of the other Party to use a firm name of their choice in line with the conventions of the Party; and  
 (e) establish dialogues with the relevant bodies of the other Party, with a view to the development of mutual recognition arrangements.  
 
3. A Party may consider, if feasible, taking steps to encourage its relevant bodies to consider implementing procedures for the temporary, or project -specific 
licensing of professional service suppliers of the other Party.  That regime 
should not operate to prevent a professional service supplier gaining a local licence once that supplier satisfies the applicable local licensing requirements.  
  
Article 10. 5 
Recognition of Professional Qualifications  
 1. If access to or pursuit of a regulated profession
4 in the jurisdiction of the other 
Party is contingent on possession of specific professional qualifications, that Party shall encourage, as appropriate, its relevant bodies to establish and operate systems for recognition of professional qualifications obtained in the other Party’s jurisdiction.  
 2. Nothing in paragraph 1 shall prevent a Party, or a relevant bod y of a Party, 
from:  
 
(a) negotiating mutual recognition arrangements; or  
 (b) requiring that natural persons meet  additional  conditions that apply 
to the practice of a particular  profession in that Party.  
 3. Each Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to take into account, as appropriate, plurilateral or multilateral agreements that relate to professional services in the development of systems for the recognition of professional qualifications.  
  
                                                            
4 “Regulated profession” means a profession, the practice of which, including the use of a title or 
designation, is subject to the possession of specific professional qualifications by virtue of a measure 
of a Party.  Article 10. 6 
Professional Services Working Group  
 
1. The Parties hereby establish a Professional Services Working Group 
(Working Group) composed of representatives of each Party5 to facilitate: 
 
(a) the achievement of the objectives of this Chapter; and  
 
(b) the effective implementation and administration of systems for recognition of professional qualifications, as provided in paragraph 1 of Article 10.5 (Recognition of Professional Qualifications).  
 2. The Working Group shall liaise, as appropriate, to support the relevant bodies of each Party in pursuing the objectives of this Chapte r.  This support may 
include providing points of contact, facilitating meetings, and providing information regarding regulation of professional services.  
 3. The Working Group shall support relevant bodies in the development of systems for recognition of professional qualifications, including having regard to how those relevant bodies establish, and the manner in which they administer, those systems.  This support may include:  
 
(a) providing information on:  
 (i) systems used by other professions; and  
 (ii) the development of mutual recognition arrangements;  
 
(b)  identifying possible improvements in the systems; and  
  (c) sharing best practices.  
 4. The Working Group may consider developing model mutual recognition arrangements and procedures for the tempor ary or project -specific licensing 
of professional services suppliers with a view to facilitating the negotiation of those arrangements or the adoption of those procedures by relevant bodies.  
 5. The Working Group may request updates from the Dialogue esta blished 
under Article 10.8 (Legal Services Regulatory Dialogue) on the progress of 
the conclusion of any arrangement which stems from discussions within the Dialogue. 
 6. The Working Group shall meet annually for three years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as agreed by the Parties.  
 
                                                            
5 The relevant bodies in each Party’s jurisdiction may also be invited to participate in the Working 
Group.  7. The Working Group shall report to the Committee on Services and 
Investment on its progress, including with respect to a recommendation for initiatives to promote recognition of professional qualifications, temporary licensing, and on the further direction of its work, no later than two years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or as agreed by the Parties.   
 
 
Article 10. 7 
Legal Services  
 1. Nothing in this Article shall affect the right of a Party to regulate and supervise the supply of legal services, referred to in paragraph 2, in a non-discriminatory manner. 
 2. Paragraph 3 applies to measures of a Party affecting the supply of legal advisory services and legal arbitration, conciliation, and mediation services in relation to: 
 
(a) the law of the other Party; 
 (b) other foreign law to the extent the lawyer of the other Party is qualified to practise that law (and not being the law of the host Party); or 
 (c) international law.  
 
3. A Party (host Party) shall: 
 
(a) allow a national of the other Party who is professionally qualified 
and authorised in the other Party to practise as a lawyer to supply services, referred to in paragraph 2, without having to requalify as, or be authorised to practise as, a domestic (host Party) lawyer; an
d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 (b) not impose disproportionately complex or burdensome administrative or regulatory conditions on, or for, the supply of these services by persons referred to in subparagraph (a).  
 
4. The obligations in paragraph 3 do not extend to:  
(a) legal representation services in matters or proceedings before administrative agencies, the courts, or other duly constituted official tribunals of a Party;  
 (b) legal advisory and legal authorisation, documentation, and certification services supplied by legal professionals entrusted with public functions such as notaries, and services supplied by bailiffs; and  (c) services supplied by patent or trademark attorneys.  
 
 
Article 10. 8 
Legal Services Regulatory Dialogue 
 1. The Parties recognise that legal services play an essential role in facilitating trade and investment and in promoting economic growth and business confidence.  
 2. The Parties shall establish a Legal Services Regulatory Dialogue (the Dialogue) composed of  representatives from the legal professions of each 
Party.
6  The Dialogue may establish expert sub -groups to consider matters 
set out in paragraph 3. 
 
3. The objectives of the Dialogue are to:  
 
(a) consider any matters affecting the re- qualification of lawyers of one 
Party seeking admission to practise in the other Party.  Issues in scope for consideration include:  
 
(i) the progressive reduction and removal of academic pre -
requisites and additional practical legal training , particularly 
for experienced lawyers;  
  
(ii) post- qualification supervision;  
 
(iii) the improvement in transparency and availability of existing conditional admission routes;  
 (iv) the feasibility of recognising legal qualifications obtained in one Party without the requirement for an aptitude examination or adaptation period to be undertaken in the other Party; and 
 (v) timeframes for requalification and admission to practise  law;  
 
(b) share expertise on matters affecting the types of business structures through which lawyers and enterprises of one Party may establish and supply legal services in the other Party, including limited liability partnerships, incorporated legal practices, or multi-disciplinary partnerships; and  
 
                                                            
6 These may include representatives, for Australia, from the Law Council of Australia, the Legal 
Services Council and Admissions  Committee established under the Legal Profession Uniform Law, 
and the Law Admissions Consultative Committee, and for the United Kingdom, from the Law Society of England and Wales, the Solicitors Regulation Authority, the General Council of the Bar of Engl and 
and Wales, the Bar Standards Board, the Law Society of Scotland, the Faculty of Advocates, the Law 
Society of Northern Ireland, and the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland.  (c) share information and knowledge on other regulatory matters, 
including on licensing and standards, recognition of professional qualifications, and on wider matters affecting the trade in legal services between the Parties.  
 
4. The Parties shall encourage the Dialogue to meet annually, or more frequently as required, for the first three years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as determined by the Dialogue.  
 5. The Parties shall encourage the Dia logue to provide the Professional Services 
Working Group with a report on the progress of objectives set out in paragraph 3 no later than 20 months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and subsequently provide, if requested, any updates on facilitating the conclusion of any arrangement which stems from discussions within the Dialogue.  
 CHAPTER  11 
 
TEMPORARY ENTRY FOR BUSINESS PERSONS  
 
 
Article 11.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 “business person ” means a national of a Party  who is engaged in trade in 
goods, the supply of services, or the conduct of investment activities;  “immigration formality ” means a visa, permit, pass or other document or 
electronic authority granting temporary entry;  
 “immigration measure ” means any measure affecting the entry and stay of 
foreign nationals; and  
 “temporary entry ” means entry into the territory of a Party by a business 
person of the other Party who does not intend to establish permanent residence.  
  
Article 11.2 
Scope  
 1.   This Chapter applies to measures that affect the temporary entry of business persons of a Party into the territory of the other Party , under any of the 
following categories as defined in each Party’s Annex IV ( Schedules of 
Specific Commitments on Temporary Entry for Business Persons): 
 
(a) for Australia: 
 
(i)  business visitors; 
 
(ii)  installers and service rs; 
 
(iii) intra-corporate transferees;  
 
(iv)  independent executives; and 
 
(v)  contractual service suppliers  
 
(b)  for the United Kingdom: 
 
(i)  business visitors for establishment purposes;  
 (ii)  short- term business visitors;  
 
(iii)  intra-corporate transferees;  
 
(iv)  investors ;  
 
(v)  contractual service suppliers; and 
 
(vi)  independent professionals.  
 
2.   This Chapter does not apply to measures affecting nationals seeking access 
to the employment market of the other Party, nor does it apply to measures regarding citizenship, nationality, residence , or employment on a permanent 
basis.  
 3.   Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of nationals of the other Party into, or their temporary stay 
in, its territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across its borders, provided that those measures are not applied in a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to the other Party under this Chapter.  
 4. The sole fact that a Party requires business persons o f the other Party to obtain 
an immigration formality shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing the benefits accruing to the other Party under this Chapter.  
  
Article 11.3  
Application Procedures  
 1.  As expeditiously as possible after receipt of a complete application for an immigration formality, each Party shall make a decision on the application and inform the applicant of the decision including, if approved, the period of stay and other conditions. 
 2. At the request of an applicant, a Party that has received a complete application for an immigration formality shall endeavour to promptly provide information concerning the status of the application. 
 3.  Each Party shall ensure that fees charged by its competent authorities for the processing of an application for an immigration formality are reasonable, in that they do not unduly impair or delay trade in goods or services or conduct of investment activities under this Agreement.  
 Article 11.4  
Grant of Temporary Entry 
 
1.  Each Party shall set out in Annex IV (Schedules of Specific Commitments on Temporary Entry for Business Persons)  the commitments it makes with 
regard to temporary entry of business persons, which shall specify the conditions and limitations for entry and temporary stay, including length of stay, for each category of business persons specified  by that Party  in 
paragraph 1 of Article 11.2 (Scope).  
 2.   A Party shall grant temporary entry or extension of temporary stay to busine ss persons of the other Party to the extent provided for in those 
commitments made pursuant to paragraph 1, provided that those business persons: 
 
(a) follow the granting Party’s prescribed application procedures for the relevant immigration formality; and  
 
(b) meet all relevant eligibility requirements for temporary entry or extension of temporary stay. 
 3.  The sole fact that a Party grants temporary entry to a business person  of the 
other Party pursuant to this Chapter shall not be construed to exempt that business person from meeting any applicable licensing or other requirements, including any mandatory codes of conduct, to practise a profession or otherwise engage in busine ss activities.  
 4.  A Party may refuse to issue an immigration formality to a business  person of 
the other Party if the temporary entry of that person might affect adversely:    
 
(a) the settlement of any labour dispute that is in progress at the place or 
intended place of employment; or  
 
(b) the employment of any natural person who is involved in such dispute.  
 
5. When a Party refuses, pursuant to paragraph 4 , to issue an immigration 
formality, it shall inform the appl icant accordingly.  
 6. In respect of the commitments on temporary entry in this Chapter, neither Party shall:  
 
(a)  impose or maintain any limitations on the total number of visas to be granted to business persons of the other Party; or  
 
(b) require economic needs tests, including labour market tests, or other 
procedures of similar effect , as a condition for temporary entry.  
 7. For greater certainty, each Party’s measures regarding employment1 shall 
continue to apply, including those concerning minim um wages or collective 
wage agreements.  
 
 
Article 11.5 
Provision of Information  
 1.  Further to Article 28.2 (Publication  – Transparency and Anti -Corruption) and 
Article 28.5 (Provision of Information – Transparency and Anti -Corruption), 
each Party shall make publicly available information relating to current requirements for the temporary entry by business persons of the other Party, specified in paragraph 1 of Article 11.2 (Scope).   
 2.  The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall include, where applicable, the following: 
 
(a)  categories of immigration formality;  
 
(b) documentation required and conditions to be met;   
 
(c)  method of filing an application and options on where to file, such as consular offices or online; 
 
(d)  application fees and an indicative timeframe of the processing of an application;   
 
(e)  the maximum length of stay under each category of immigration formality;  
 
(f)  conditions for any available extension or renewal; 
 
(g)  rules regarding accompanying dependants ; and  
 
(h)  available review or appeal procedures.  
 3.  With respect to the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, each Party 
shall endeavour to  promptly make publicly available  and inform the other 
Party , through existing mechanisms , of the introduction of any significant 
new requirements and procedures or of the changes in any requirements and procedures that affect the effective application for the grant of entry into, and where applicable, permission to work in its territory. 
  
                                                            
1 For the U nited Kingdom, this includes the continued application of all social security measures .  
 Article 11.6  
Relation to Other Chapters  
 
1.  Except for this Chapter, Chapter 1 (Initial Provisions and General Definitions), Chapter 29 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions),  
Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement), Chapter 32 (Final Provisions), Article  28.2 
(Publication – Transparency and Anti -Corruption), and Article 28.5 
(Provision of Information – Transparency and Anti -Corruption), no provision 
of this Agreement shall impose any obligation on a Party regarding its immigration measures.  
 2.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or 
commitments with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.  
  
Article 11.7  
Dispute Settlement  
 1.  Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 30  
(Dispute Settlement) regarding a refusal to grant temporary entry unless: 
 
(a)  the matter involves a pattern of practice; and  
 
(b)  the business persons affected have exhausted all available administrative remedies regarding the particular matter.  
 2.  The remedies referred to in paragraph 1(b) shall be deemed to be exhausted if a final determination in the matter has not been issued by the other Party within a reasonable period of time after the date of the institution of proceedings for the remedy, including any proceedings for review or appeal, and the failure to issue such a determination is not attributable to delays caused by the business persons concerned.  
  
Article 11.8 
Cooperation on return and readmissions  
 
The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the return and 
readmission of business persons staying in the territory of a Party, where such business person is in contravention of the host Party’s measures relating to temporary entry.   CHAPTER 12 
 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
 
 
Article 12.1 
Definitions  
   For the purposes of this Chapter:  
“cost-oriented ” means based on cost, and may include a reasonable profit, 
and may involve different cost methodologies for different facilities or services;  
 “end -user” means a final consumer of , or subscriber to , a public 
telecommunications service, including a service supplier other than a supplier of public telecommunications services;  “essential facilities” means facilities of a public telecommunications network or service that:  
 
(a) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single or 
limited number of suppliers; and 
 
(b) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in 
order to provide a service;  
 “interconnection” means linking with suppliers providing public telecommunications networks or services in order to allow the users of one supplier to communicate with users of another supplier and to access services 
provided by another supplier;  “international mobile roaming service” means a commercial mobile service provided pursuant to a commercial agreement between suppliers of public telecommunications services that enables an end -user whose mobile handset 
or other device normally accesses public telecommunication services in the territory of one Party to use their mobile handset or other device for voice, data, or messaging services in the territory of the other Party;  
 “leased circuits” means telecommunications services or facilities between two or more designated points that are set aside for the dedicated use of, or availability to, a particular user;  
 “licence” means any authorisation that a Party may require of a person, in 
accordance with its laws and regulations, in order for that person to offer a public telecommunications network or service, including concessions, 
permits or registrations;  “major supplier” means a supplier of public telecommunications networks or 
services that has the ability to materially affect the terms of participation,  
having regard to price and supply, in a relevant market for public 
telecommunications networks or services as a result of:  
 
(a)  control over essential facilities;  or 
 
(b)  use of its position in that market;  
 
“network element” means a facility or equipment used in the provision of a public telecommunications service, including features, functions, and capabilities provided by means of that fac ility or equipment;  
 “non- discriminatory” means treatment no less favourable than that accorded, 
in like circumstances, to users of  like public telecommunications networks or 
services, including with respect to timeliness;  
 “number portability” means the ability of end -users of public 
telecommunications services to retain, at the same location , the same 
telephone number s when switching between the same category of suppliers 
of public telecommunications services;  “public telecommunications network” means telecommunications infrastructure used to provide public telecommunications services between defined network termination points;  “public telecommunications service” means any telecommunications service 
that is offered to the public generally;  “reference interconnection offer” means a publicly available interconnection 
offer extended by a major supplier and filed with, approved by , or determined 
by, a telecommunications regulatory authority that sufficiently details the 
terms, rates , and conditions for interconnection so that a supplier of public 
telecommunications networks or services that is willing to accept it may obtain interconnection with the major supplier on that basis;  “telecommunications” means the transmission and reception of signals by any el ectromagnetic means;   
 “telecommunications regulatory authority
1” means a body or bodies 
responsible for the regulation of telecommunications; and  “user” means a service consumer or a service supplier using a public telecommunications network or service.    
 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, for Australia, the telecommunications regulatory authorities are the 
Australian Communications and Media Authority (or its successor) and the Australian Competition 
and Consumer Commission (or its successor).  Article 12.2 
Scope  
 
1. This Chapter applies to measures of a Party affecting trade in telecommunications services.  
 2. This Chapter does not apply to:  
(a) audio- visual services;  
 
(b) any measure affecting services providing, or exercising editorial control over, content transmitted using telecommunications networks or services; or  
 
(c) any measure affecting broadcast or cable distribution of radio or 
television programming, except that:  
 
(i) Article 12.4 (Access and Use) applies with respect to a ca ble 
or broadcast services supplier’s access to and use of public telecommunications services; and  
 
(ii) Article 12.21  (Transparency) applies to any measure affecting 
broadcast or cable distribution of radio or television programming, to the extent that the  measure also affects public 
telecommunications networks or services.  
 3. Nothing in this Chapter shall  be construed to:  
 
(a) require a Party, or require a Party to compel an  enterprise, to establish, 
construct, acquire, lease, operate , or provide a telecommunications 
network or service not offered to the public generally; 
 (b) require a Party to compel an  enterprise exclusively engaged in the 
broadcast or cable distribution of radio or television programming to make available its broadcast or cable facilities as a public telecommunications network; or 
 (c) prevent a Party from prohibiting a person who operates a private network from using its private network to supply a public telecommunications network or service to third persons.   
  
Article 12.3 
Approaches to Regulation 
 1. The Parties recognise the value of competitive markets to deliver a wide choice in the supply of telecommunications networks or services and to enhance consumer welfare, and that economic regulation may not be needed  if there is effective competition or if a service is new to a market.  
Accordingly, the Parties recognise that regulatory needs and approaches 
differ market by market, and that each Party may determine how to implement its obligations under this Chapter.  
 2. In this respect, the Parties recognise that a Party may:  
 
(a) engage in direct regulation either in anticipation of an issue that the Party expects may arise or to resolve an issue that has already arisen 
in the market;  
 (b) rely on the role of market forces, particularly with respect to market segments that are, or are likely to be, competitive or that have low barriers to entry, such as services provided by suppliers of telecommunications services that do not own network facilities; or 
 (c) use any other appropriate means that benefit the long- term interest s 
of end- users.  
 3. A Party that refrains from engaging in regulation in accordance with this 
Article remains subject to the obligations under this Chapter.   
  
Article 12.4 
Access and Use 
 1. Each Party shall ensure that any service supplier of the other Party has access 
to and use of any public telecommunications network or service , including 
leased circuits, offered in its territory or across its borders on a timely basis and on reasonable, transparent, and non- discriminatory terms and conditions.  
This obligation shall be applied, inter alia, through paragraphs 2 to 6.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that service suppliers  of the other Party are permitted 
to: 
 
(a) purchase or lease and attach terminal or other equipment that interfaces with a public telecommunications network;  
 (b) provide services to individual or multiple end -users over leased or 
owned circuits;  
 (c) interconnect leased or owned circuits with public telecommunications networks or services or with circuits leased or owned by a nother 
service supplier;  
 (d) use operating protocols of their choice; and  (e) perform switching, signalling, processing, and conversion functions.   
3. Each Party shall ensure that  service supplier s of the other Party  may use 
public telecommunications networks or services for the movement of 
information in its territory or across its borders , including for  intra-corporate 
communications of such service suppliers, and for access to information 
contained in databases or otherwise stored in machine-readabl e form in the 
territory of either Party.  
 4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may take  such measures as  are 
necessary to:  
 (a) ensure the security and confidentiality of messages; or 
 (b) protect the privacy of personal data of end- users of public 
telecommunications networks or services,  
 subject to the requirement that the measures taken are not applied in a manner 
that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade in services.  
 5. Each Party shall ensure that no condition is imposed on access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services other than as necessary to:   (a) safeguard the public service responsibilities of suppliers  of public 
telecommunications networks or services, in particular their ability to make their networks or services available to the public generally; or  
 (b) protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or services.  
 6. Provided that they satisfy the criteria set out in paragraph 5, conditions for 
access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services may include: 
 
(a) a requirement to use specified technical interfaces, including interface protocols, for interconnection with those  networks and services;  
 (b) a requirement, if necessary, for the interoperability  of those networks 
and services;  
 (c) type approval of terminal or other equipment that interfaces with the 
network and technical requirements relating to the attachment of that equipment to th ose netwo rks; and 
 (d) notification, registration , and licensing.  Article 12.5 
Access to Essential Facilities and Unbundled Network Elements  
 
1. Subject to paragraph 2, e ach Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its 
territory provide to suppliers  of public telecommunications networks or 
services of the other Party:  (a) access to essential facilities
2; and 
 (b) access to network elements on an unbundled basis,  for the purpose of providing public telecommunications networks or services on terms and conditions, and at cost -oriented rates, which are reasonable, 
non-discriminatory , and transparent.  Subject to technical feasibility, access 
shall be provided on a timely basis. 
 2. E ach Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations:  
 (a) the essential facilities to which a major supplier must provide access; and 
 (b) the network elements a major supplier must provide on an unbundled basis.  
 3. If a Party makes a determination under subparagraphs 2(a) or 2(b), it shall take into account factors such as the competitive effect of lack of access and the long- term interests of end -users.    
  
Article 12.6 
Resale  
 1. Neither Party shall prohibit the resale of any public telecommunications 
services. 
 2. Each Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which public telecommunications services must be offered for resale by  major 
suppliers of public telecommunications services, taking into account the need 
to promote competition or  benefits to the long- term interests of end -users.  
Where a Party has determined that a service must be offered for resale by major suppliers , that Party shall ensure that any major suppliers in its territory 
do not impose unreasonable or discriminatory conditions or limitations on the 
resale of that service.    
  
                                                            
2 The major supplier’s essential facilities may include leased circuit services, poles, ducts, conduits, 
and rights -of-way.  Article 12.7 
Competitive Safeguards  
 
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate measures  for the purpose of 
preventing suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services in its 
territory  that, alone or together,  are a major supplier from engaging in or 
continuing anti- competitive practices.  
 2. The anti -competitive practices referred to in paragraph 1 include , in 
particular:  
 (a) engaging in anti- competitive cross -subsid isation;  
 (b) using information obtained from competitors with anti -competitive  
results;  and  
 (c) not making available, on a timely basis, to suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services, technical information about essential facilities and commercially relevant information that is necessary for them to provide services.  
  
Article 12.8 
Treatment by Major Suppliers  
  Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory accords  suppliers 
of public telecommunications networks or servic es of the other Party 
treatment no less favourable than that major supplier accords in like circumstances to itself, its subsidiaries, its affiliates, or non -affiliated 
suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services regarding the:  
 (a) availability, provisioning, rates , or quality of like public 
telecommunications networks or services; and  
 (b) availability of technical interfaces necessary for interconnection.   
  
Article 12.9 
Interconnection with Suppliers  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that  suppliers of public telecommunications networks 
or services in its territory: 
 
(a) provide interconnection with suppliers of public telecommunications  
networks or services of the other Party; or  (b) enter into negotiations for interconnection with suppliers of public 
telecommunications networks or services of the other Party, if 
requested to do so by that supplier. 
 2. In carrying out paragraph 1, each Party shall ensure that  suppliers of public 
telecommunications networks or services in its territory take reasonable steps to protect the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information of, or relating to, suppliers and end- users of public telecommunications services 
obtained as a result of interconnection arrangements and that those suppl iers 
only use that information for the purpose of providing these services.   
  
Article 12.10  
Interconnection with Major Suppliers  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its territory provide 
interconnection for the facilities of supplier s of public telecommunications 
networks or services of the other Party:  (a) at any technically feasible point in the major supplier’s network; 
 (b) under non- discriminatory terms  and conditions ( including as regards 
rates, technical standards, specifications, quality and maintenance) ; 
 (c) of a quality no less favourable than that provided by the major supplier for its own like services, for like services of non -affiliated service 
suppliers, or for its subsidiaries or other affiliates; 
 (d) on a timely basis, and on terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications) , and cost -oriented rates that are 
transparent, reasonable, having regard to economic feasibility, and sufficiently unbundled so that the supplier need not pay for network components or facilities that it does not require for the service to be 
provided; and 
 (e) on request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered to the majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost 
of construction of necessary additional facilities.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that supplier s of public telecommunications networks 
or services of the other Party may interconnect with major supplier s in its 
territory through at least one of the following options:  (a) a reference interconnection offer or another standard  interconnection 
offer containing the rates, terms, and conditions that the major supplier offers generally to suppliers of public telecommunications services; or  (b) the terms and conditions of an interconnection agreement in effect. 
  
3. In addition to the options provided in paragraph 2, each Party shall ensure that suppliers  of public telecommunications services of the other Party have 
the opportunity to interconnect their facilities and equipment with those of the major supplier through the negotiation of a new interconnection agreement.  
 4.  Each Party shall ensure that the applicable procedures for interconnection negotiations with major suppliers  in its territory are made publicly available.  
 5. Each Party shall ensure that  major suppliers in its territory make  publicly 
available either their interconnection agreements or a reference interconnection offer.   
 
 
Article 12.11  
Number Portability  
 
Each Party shall ensure that  suppliers of public telecommunications 
services in its territory provide  number portability, for those services 
designated by that Party, without impairment to quality , reliability , or 
convenience, to the extent technically feasible, on a timely basis, and on reaso nable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions.   
  
Article 12.12 
Access to Numbers  
 
Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications 
services of the other Party established in its territory  are afforded access to 
telephone numbers on a non- discriminatory basis.   
  
Article 12.13 
International Mobile Roaming  
 1. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on promoting transparent and reasonable rates for international mobile roaming services that can help promote the growth of trade between the Parties and enhance consumer welfare.  
 2. A Party may choose to take steps to enhance transparency and competition with respect to international mobile roaming rates and technological alternatives to roaming  services, such as:  
 (a) ensuring that information regarding retail rates is easily accessible to consumers; and   
(b) minimising impediments to the use of technological alternatives to roaming, whereby consumers , when visiting the territory of a Party 
from the territory of the other Party , can access telecommunications 
services using the device of their choice.  
 
3. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services in its territory, or its telecommunications regulatory authority , make publicly 
available information on retail rates for international mobile roaming services for voice, data , and text messages offered to consumers when visiting the 
territory of the other Party.  
 4. The Parties recognise that a Party, if it has the authority to do so, may choose to adopt or maintain measures affecting rates for wholesale international roaming services with a view to ensuring that t hose rates are reasonable.  If a 
Party considers it ap propriate, it may cooperate on and implement 
mechanisms with the other Party to facilitate the implementation of those measures, including by entering into arrangements with the other Party. 
 5. If the Parties enter into an arrangement to reciprocally regulate rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services for suppliers of public telecommunications services of both Parties, each Party shall ensure that supplier s of public telecommunications services of the other Party have 
access to  the regulated rates or conditions
3 for wholesale international mobile 
roaming services for the suppliers’ customers roaming in that Party’s 
territory .4 
 6. A Party that ensures access to regulated rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services in accordance with paragraph 5 shall be deemed to be in compliance with its obligations under Article 8.4 (Most -
Favoured- Nation Treatment  – Cross-Border Trade in Services), Article 12.4 
(Access and Use), and Article 12.8 ( Treatment by Major Suppliers ) with 
respect to international mobile roaming services.  
 7. Nothing in this Article  shall require  a Party to regulate rates or conditions for 
international mobile roaming services.   
  
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, access under paragraph 5 to the rates or conditions regulated by a Party shall 
be available to a supplier of  the other Pa rty only if those  regulated rates or conditions are reasonably 
comparable to those reciprocally regulated under the arrangement referred to in this paragraph.  The 
telecommunications regulatory authority of the first Party shall, in the case o f disagreement, 
determine whether the rates or conditions are reasonably comparable.  
4 For greater certainty, neither Party shall, solely on the basis of any obligation s owed to it by the  
other Party under a most -favoured -nation provision, or under a telecommunications -specific non -
discrimination provision, in any existing international trade agreement, seek or obtain for its 
suppliers the access to regulated rates or conditions for wholesa le international mobile roaming 
services that is provided under this Article.  Article 12.14 
Submarine Cable Landing Stations and Systems  
 
1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its laws and regulations, that  
suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of the other 
Party has access to submarine cable landing stations and systems in its territory on reasonable, non- discriminatory, and transparent terms and 
conditions for the purpose of providing a public telecommuni cations network 
or service.  
 2. Each Party may mitigate the risk of damage to submarine telecommunications cable landing stations and systems in its territory that are operated, owne d, or controlled by a person of the other Party, which may 
include measures to maintain the functionality of the cable system.    
  
Article 12.15 
Independent Regulatory Authorities  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory authority is separate from, and not accountable to, any supplier of public 
telecommunications networks or services.  With a view to ensuring the independence and impartiality of telecommunications regulatory authorities , 
each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory authority does not hold a f inancial interest
5 or maintain an operating or management role in 
any supplier of public telecommunications networks or services.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that the regulatory decisions and procedures of its telecommunications regulatory authority are impartial with respect to all market participants.  
 3. Neither Party shall accord more favourable treatment to a supplier of telecommunications services in its territory than that accorded to a like service supplier of the other Party on the basis that the  supplier receiving 
more favourable treatment is owned by the national government of the Party.    
  
Article 12.16 
Universal Service  
 1. Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligation it 
wishes to maintain.  
 2.  Each Party shall administer any universal service obligation that it maintains 
in a transparent, non- discriminatory , and competitively neutral manner , and 
                                                            
5 This paragraph shall not be  construed to prohibit a government entity of a Party other than the 
telecommunications regulatory authority  from owning equity in a supplier of publ ic 
telecommunications networks or services.  shall ensure that its universal service obligation is not more burdensome than 
necessary for the kind of universal service that it has defined.   Universal 
service obligations defined according to these principles shall not be regarded per se as anti -competitive.    
  
Article 12.17 
Licensing and Authorisation Process  
 1.  Each Party may permit a supplier of  public telecommunications services to 
provide their services without prior formal authorisation, such as a licence. 
 2. If a Party requires a supplier of a public telecommunications services to have a licence, the Party shall ensure the public availabilit y of: 
 (a) all the licensing criteria and procedures that it applies;  
 (b) the period of time normally required to reach a decision concerning an application for a licence; and  
 (c) the terms and conditions of individual licences. 
 
3. Each Party shall ensure that, on request, an applicant receives the reasons for the:  (a)  denial of a licen ce; 
 (b) imposition of supplier- specific conditions on a licence; 
 (c) revocation of a licence; or 
 (d) refusal to renew a licence.    
  
Article 12.18 
Scarce Resources  
 1. Each Party shall administer its procedures for the allocation and use of scarce resources, including radio spectrum, numbers , and rights of way, in an 
objective, timely, transparent, and non -discriminatory manner.  
 2. Each Party shall make pu blicly available the current state of allocated 
frequency bands, but detailed identification of radio spectrum that is  allocated 
or assigned  for specific government uses is not required. 
 3. A measure of a Party allocating and assigning spectrum and managing frequency is not per se inconsistent with  Article 8.5 (Market Access – Cross -
Border Trade in Services ) and Article 13.4 ( Market Access – Investment) .  Accordingly, each Party retains the right to establish and apply spectrum and 
frequency management policies that may have the effect of limiting the 
number of suppliers of public telecommunications services, provided that the Party does so in a manner consistent with this Agreement.  This includes the ability to allocate frequency bands, taking into account current and future needs and spectrum availability.  
 4. When making a spectrum allocation for commercial telecommunications services, each Party shall endeavour to rely on an open and transparent process that considers the public interest, including the promotion of competition.  Each Party may rely on market -based approaches, such as 
auctions, to assign spectrum for commercial use.   
  
Article 12.19 
Flexibility in the Choice of Technology  
 1. Neither Party shall prevent a supplier of public  telecommunications services 
from choosing the technologies it wishes to use to supply its services. 
 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may apply a  measure that limits the 
technologies that a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services may use to supply its services, provided that the measure is designed 
to achieve a legitimate public policy interest and is not adopted or applied in a manner that creates unnecessary obstacles to trade in services.  
 3. If a Party finances the development  of advanced networks,
6 it may make its 
financing conditional on the use of technologies that meet its legitimate public policy interests.   
  
Article 12.20  
Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes  
 
Each Party shall ensure that:  
 
(a) suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of the 
other Party have timely recourse to a telecommunications regulatory 
authority or judicial authority  of the Party to consider and, to the 
extent provided for in its laws and regulations, to resolve a  dispute 
regarding  the Party’s  measures relating to the obligations contained 
in this Chapter;  
 
                                                            
6 For greater certainty, “advanced networks” includes broadband networks.  (b) in the event of a dispute referred to in subparagraph (a), the 
telecommunications regulatory authority or judicial authority of the 
Party:  
 (i) issues a binding decision to resolve a dispute; 
 (ii) provides a supplier that is a party to the dispute with the 
reasons for its decision; and  
 (iii) make its decision publicly available to the extent provided for in its laws and regulations;  
 
(c) notwithstanding subparagraph (b), if the telecommunications 
regulatory authority of the Party declines to initiate an  action on a 
request to resolve a dispute, it provides the  supplier of the other Party 
that is a party to the dispute with the reasons for its decision;  
 (d) a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services of the other Party aggrieved by a decision of the telecommunications regulatory authority has the  right to appeal that decision to a judicial 
authority.  That appeal shall not constitute groun ds for noncompliance 
by that supplier with the  decision, unless its relevant authority 
determines otherwise.  
 (e) in the hearing of an appeal by a judicial authority referred to in subparagraph (d):  (i) a supplier that is a party to the appeal has a reasonable opportunity to obtain sufficient information to form informed views on the issues to be determined in the appeal and to provide those views to the judicial authority;  
 (ii) the judicial authority takes into account views provided by that supplie r; and  
 (iii) the judicial authority makes available to that supplier its decision and the reasons on which the decision is based; and 
 (f) a supplier of public telecommunications services of the other Party that has requested interconnection with a major supplier in the Party’s territory may seek review, within a reasonable and publicly specified period of time after the supplier requests interconnection, by its telecommunications regulatory authority to resolve a dispute regarding the terms, conditions, and rates for interconnection with that major supplier.  Article 12.21  
Transparency  
 
1. Further to Chapter 28 (Transparency and Anti -Corruption), each Party shall 
endeavour to ensure that: 
 
(a) telecommunications service suppliers are provided with adequate advance notice of, and opportunity to comment on, a regulatory 
decision of general application that its telecommunications regulatory authority proposes; and 
 
(b) suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of the other Party are, on request, provided with a clear and detailed explanation of  the reason s for a decision to deny access of the kind 
specified in Article  12.5 (Access to Essential Facilities and 
Unbundled Network Eleme nts) and Article 12.10 (Interconnection 
with Major Suppliers) where that decision is made, approved, endorsed, or authorised by the Party.  
 2. Further to Chapter 28 (Transparency and Anti -Corruption), each Party shall 
ensure that its measures relating to public telecommunications networks or services are made publicly available, including:  
 (a) tariffs and other terms and conditions of service; 
 (b) specifications of technical interfaces;  
 (c) conditions for attaching terminal or other equipment to the public telecommunications network; 
 (d) notification, permit, registration , or licensing requirements, if any; 
 (e) general procedures relating to resolution of telecommunications disputes provided for in Article 12.20 (Resolution of 
Telecommunications Disputes); and  
 (f) information on bodies responsible for preparing, amending, and adopting standards- related measures.    
  
Article 12.22  
Enforcement  
 
Each Party shall provide its telecommunications regulatory authority with the 
authority to enforce  the Party’s measures relating to the obligations in Article 12.4 
(Access and Use) , Article 12.5 ( Access to Essential Facilities and Unbundled 
Network Elements ), Article 12.6 ( Resale ), Article 12.7  ( Competitive Safeguards ), 
Article 12.8  ( Treatment by Major Suppliers ), Article 12.9  ( Interconnection with  Suppliers) , Article 12.10   (Interconnection with Major Suppliers ), Article 12.11  
(Number Portability ), Article 12.12  ( Access to Numbers) , Article  12.14 (Submarine 
Cable Landing Stations and Systems), and Article 12 .17 ( Licensing and 
Authorisation Process ).  That authority shall be exercised transparently, in a timely 
manner, and include the ability to impose, or seek from administrative or judicial 
bodies, effective sanctions, which may include financ ial penalties, injunctive relief 
(on an interim or final basis), or the modification, suspension, or revocation of 
licences.   
 
 
Article 12.23  
Relation to International Organisations  
 
The Parties recognise the importance of international standards for global 
compatibility and interoperability of telecommunications networks and services and undertake to promote those standards through the work of relevant international organisations.     
Article 12.24  
Cooperation 
 1. The Parties recognise the transformational impact of communications networks, infrastructure , and technologies (including those that are new and 
emerging), and the importance of these technologies to the Parties’ respective economies and societies.  
 2. Accordingly, each Party shall take measures to:  
 (a) encourage a diverse and competitive market for telecommunications services and networks in its territory; and  
 (b) protect the security and integrity of its telecommunications infrastructure.  
 3. The Parties shall endeavour to:  
 (a) exchange information on the opportunities and challenges associated with communication networks, infrastructure, and technologies; and  
 (b) work together in regional and multilateral fora to promote a shared 
approach to these opportunities and challenges.  Article 12.25  
Confidentiality  
 
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its laws and regulations, the 
confidentiality of telecommunications and related traffic data7 of users over public 
telecommunications networks and services without unduly restricting trade in 
services.    
                                                            
7 For the purposes of this Article, “traffic data” means  any data processed for the purpose of 
transmitting a communication over a public telecommunications network or service, and includes data relating to the duration or time of the communication, or the location from which the communication 
was made.CHAPTER 13  
 
INVESTMENT  
 
 
Article 13.1 
Definitions  
 
  For the purposes of this Chapter:   
 
“activities carried out in the exercise of governmental authority” means 
activities carried out neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more economic operators; 
 “enterprise” means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.4 (General 
Defin itions – Initial Provisions and General Definitions), and a branch 
of an enterprise;   
 
“enterprise of a Party” means:  
 
(a) an enterprise, as defined in Article 1.4 (General Definitions – 
Initial Provisions and General Definitions),  constituted or 
organis ed under the law of that Party, or a branch located in the 
territory of that Party,
1 and carrying out substantial business 
activities in the territory of that Party; or  
 (b) an enterprise, as defined in Article 1.4 (General Definitions – 
Initial Provision s and General Definitions), constituted or 
organised under the law of that Party and directly or indirectly owned or controlled by a national of that Party or by an enterprise  referred to in subparagraph (a);  
 
“freely usable currency” means “freely usable currency” as determined 
by the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of 
the International Monetary Fund done at Bretton Woods on 22 July 
1944 (“IMF Articles of Agreement”);   
 “investment” means every asset that an investor owns or controls, 
directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.  Forms that an investment may take include:   
 
                                                 
1  For greater certainty, the inclusion of a “branch” in the definitions of “enterprise” and 
“enterprise of a Party” i s without prejudice to a Party’s ability to treat a branch under its law 
as an entity that has no independent legal existence and is not separately organised.  
 (a) an enterprise;  
 
(b) shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation in an 
enterprise;  
 
(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments, and loans;2, 3  
 
(d) futures, options, and other derivatives;   
 
(e) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue- sharing, and other similar contracts;  
 
(f) intellectual property rights;  
 
(g) licences, authorisations, permits, and similar rights conferred pursuant to the Party’s la w;
4 and  
 
(h) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property, and related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges,  
 
but investment does not mean an order or judgment entered in a judicial 
or administrative action;  
 “investor of a non- Party” means, with respect to a Party, an investor 
that attempts to make,
5 is making, or has made an investment in the 
territory of that Party, that is not an investor of the other Party;   
 “investor of a Party” means a Party, or a national or an enterprise of a 
Party, that attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party.   
  
                                                 
2  Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures, and long -term notes, are more likely to have 
the characteristics of an investment, while other forms of debt, such as claims to payment that 
are immediately due and result from the sale of goods or services, are less likely to have such 
characteristics.    
3  A loan issued by a Party to the other Par ty is not an investment.    
4  Whether a particular type of licence, authorisation, permit, or similar instrument (including 
a concession to the extent that it has the nature of such an instrument) has the characteristics 
of an investment depends on such factors as the nature and extent of the rights that the holder has under the Party’s law.  Among such instruments that do not have the characteristics of an 
investment are those that do not create any rights protected under the Party’s law.  For greater 
certainty, the foregoing is without prejudice to whether any asset associated with such 
instruments has the characteristics of an investment.    
5  For greater certainty, the Parties understand that, for the purposes of the definitions of 
“investor of a non-P arty” and “investor of a Party”, an investor “attempts to make” an 
investment when that investor has taken concrete action or actions to make an investment, 
such as channelling resources or capital in order to set up a business, or applying for a permit or licence.  
 Article 13.2 
Scope  
 
1.  This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party 
relating to:  
 
(a) investors of the other Party;  
 
(b) covered investments; and  
 
(c) with respect to Article 13.11 (Performance Requirements ), 
Article 13.1 7 (Investment and Environmental, Health, and 
other Regulatory Objectives), Article 13. 18 (Investment and 
Environment), and Article 13.19 (Corporate Social 
Responsibility), all investments in the territory of that Party.  
 
2.  A Party’s obligations under this Chapter apply  to measures adopted or 
maintained by:  
 
(a) the central, regional, or local governments or authorities of that Party; and  
 
(b) any person, including a state enterprise or any other body, when it exercises any governmental authority delegated to it by central, regional, or local governments or authorities of that Party.
6  
 3.  For greater certainty, this Chapter does not bind a Party in relation to 
an act or fact that took place or a situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.  
 4.  With respect to the establishment , expansion or acquisition of an 
investment, Article 13.4 (Market Access), Article 13. 5 (National 
Treatment), Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured- Nation  Treatment), Article 
13.11 (Performance Requirements), and Article 13.12 (Senior 
Management and  Boards of Directors) do not apply to activities carried 
out in the exercise of governmental authority.   
 5.  Article 13. 4 (Market Access), Article 13. 5 (National Treatment), 
Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured- Nation  Treatment), Article 13.1 1 
(Performance Requir ements), and Article 13.12 ( Senior Management 
and Boards of Directors) do not apply to audio- visual services.  
 
                                                 
6  For greater certainty, governmental authority is delegated under the Party’s law, including 
through a legislative grant or a government order, directive, or other action transferring or authorising the exercise of governmental authority.  
 6.  In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and a bilateral, 
plurilateral, or multilateral air services agreement to which both Parties are party, the air services agreement shall prevail in determining the rights and obligations of the Parties.   
 7.  If the Parties have the same obligations under this Agreement and a bilateral, plurilateral, or multilateral air services agreement, a Party may invoke the dispute settlement procedures of this Agreement only after any dispute settlement procedures  in the other agreement have 
been exhausted.   
  
Article 13.3 
Relation to Other Chapters  
 1.  In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent 
of the inconsistency.  
 
2.  A requirement of a Party that a service supplier of the other Party post a bond or other form of financial security as a condition for the cross -
border supply of a service does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to measures adopted or maintai ned by the Party relating to 
such cross -border supply of the service.  This Chapter applies to 
measures adopted or maintained by the Party relating to the posted bond or financial security, to the extent that the bond or financial security is a covered inv estment.  
 3.  This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a 
Party to the extent that they are covered by Chapter 9 (Financial Services).  
  
Article 13. 4 
Market Access  
 1.  Neither Party shall adopt or maintain, with respect to market access through the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of any investment in its territory by an investor of the other Party, either on the basis of its entire territory or on the basis of the  territory of a central, regional, or 
local level of government, a measure
7 that:   
 
(a) imposes limitations on:  
 
                                                 
7 This paragraph does not  prohibit measures which apply to a specific site or a particular 
limited area within the territory of a Party.  
 (i) the number of enterprises that may carry out a specific 
economic activity whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive suppliers, or the requirement of an economic needs test;   
 (ii) the total value of transactions or assets in the form of 
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
8   
 (iii) the total number of operations or the total quantity of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;   
 (iv) the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment; or   
 (v) the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular sec tor or that an enterprise may 
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the performance of economic activity in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;  or 
 
(b) requires that an economic activity is carried out through a specific type of legal entity or by a joint venture.   
  
Article 13. 5 
National Treatment
9 
 1.  Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or ot her disposition of 
investments in its territory.  
 2.  Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment, 
                                                 
8 Sub-paragraphs  1(a)(i) through  (iii) do not cover  measures  taken  in order to limit  the 
production of an agricultural good.  
9  For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 
13.5 (National Treatment) or Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment) depends on the 
totality of the circumsta nces, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between 
investors or investments on the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.  
 acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or 
other disposition of investments.  
 3.  For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect to a regional level of 
government, treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regional level of government to investors, and to investments of investors, of the Party of which it forms a part.  
  
Article 13. 6 
Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment 
 1.  Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of a non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, 
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of 
investments in its territory.  
 2.  Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of in vestors of a non- Party with respect to the 
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.
10  
 3.  For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not encompass inter national dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms.  
  
Article 13. 7 
Minimum Standard of Treatment
11 
 1.  Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with applicable customary international law principles, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.   
  2.  For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the standard of treatment to be afforded to covered investments.  The concept s of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and 
security” do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that which 
                                                 
10  For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 do not cover treatment accorded by the United 
Kingdom to inves tors (and to their investments) of territories for whose international relations 
the United Kingdom is responsible.   
11  Article 13.7 (Minimum  Standard of Treatment) shall be interpreted in accordance with 
Annex 13A (Customary International Law).  
 is required by that standard, and do not create additional substantive 
rights.  The obligation in paragraph 1 to  provide: 
 
(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the principle of due process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world; and  
 
(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of police protection required under customary international law.   
 3.  A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this Agreement, or of a separate internatio nal agreement, does not 
establish that there has been a breach of this Article.   
 4.  For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party takes or fails to take an 
action that may be inconsistent with an investor’s expectations does 
not constitute a breach of this Article, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a result.   
 5.  For greater certainty, the mere fact that a subsidy or grant has not been issued, renewed or maintained, or has been modified or reduced, by a Party, does not constitute a breach of this Article, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a result.   
  
Article 13. 8 
Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife  
 1.  Notwithstanding subparagraph 6(b) of Article 13.13 (Non -Conforming 
Measures), each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to covered investments non- discriminatory treatment with respect to 
measures it adopts or maintains relating to losses suffered by investments in its territory owing to  armed conflict or civil strife.   
 2.  Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in a situation referred to in paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of the other Party resulting from:  
 
(a) requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces or authorities; or  
 (b) destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,  
 the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation, or 
both, as appropriate, for that loss.   
 3.  Paragraph 1 shall not apply to existing measures relating to subsidies or grants that would be inconsistent with Article 13.5 (National 
Treatment) but for subparagraph 6(b) of Article 13.1 3 (Non -
Conforming Measures).   
  
Article 13. 9 
Expropriation and Compensation
12 
 1.  Neither Party shall expropriate or nationalise a covered investment either directly or indirectly through measures equivale nt to 
expropriation or nationalisation (expropriation), except:  
 
(a) for a public purpose;
13   
 
(b) in a non- discriminatory manner;   
 
(c) on payment of prompt, adequate, and effective compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2  through  4; and   
 
(d) in a ccordance with due process of law.   
 2.  Compensation shall:    
(a) be paid without delay;  
 
(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took place (the date of expropriation);  
 
(c) not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended expropriation had become known earlier; and   
 
(d) be fully realisable and freely transferable.   
 3.  If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the compensation paid shall be no less than the fair market value on the 
date of expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate 
                                                 
12  Article 13.9 (Expropriation and Compensation) shall be interpreted in accordance with 
Annex 13B (E xpropriation).  
13  For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, the term “public purpose” refers to a 
concept in customary international law.  Domesti c law may express this or a similar concept 
by using different terms, such as “public necessity”, “public interest”, or “public use”.  
 for that currency, accrued from the date of expropriation until the date 
of payment.   
 4.  If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable, the compensation paid, converted into the currency of payment at the market rate of exchange prevailing on the date of payment, shall be no less than:  
 
(a) the fair market va lue on the date of expropriation, converted 
into a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date; plus  
 
(b) interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency, accrued from the date of expropriation  until the date 
of payment.   
 5.  This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licences 
granted in relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement, or to the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that the issuance, revocation, 
limitation, or creation is consistent with Chapter 15 (Intellectual Property) and the TRIPS Agreement.
14  
 6.  For greater certainty, a Party’s decision not to issue, renew, or maintain a subsidy or grant, or decision to modify or reduce a subsidy or grant,   
 
(a) in the absence of any specific commitment under law or contract to issue, renew, or maintain that subsidy or grant; or  
 
(b) in accordance with any terms or conditions attached to the issuance, renewal, modification, reduction, and maintenance of that subsidy or grant,  
 
standing alone, does not constitute an expropriation.  
  
Article 13. 10 
Transfers  
 1.  Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to 
be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.  Such transfers include:   
 
                                                 
14  For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that, for the purposes of this Article, the term 
“revocation” of intelle ctual property rights includes the cancellation or nullification of those 
rights, and the term “limitation” of intellectual property rights includes exceptions to those 
rights.  
 (a) contributions to capital;15  
 
(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, 
management fe es, technical assistance fees, and other fees;  
 
(c) proceeds from the sale of all or any part of the covered investment or from the partial or complete liquidation of the covered investment;  
 
(d) payments made under a contract, including a loan agreement;   
 
(e) payments made pursuant to Article 13.8 (Treatment in Case of 
Armed Conflict or Civil Strife) and Article 13. 9 (Expropriation 
and Compensation); and   
 
(f) payments arising out of a dispute.   
 
 2.  Each Party shall permit transfers relating to a covered investment to be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.  
 3.  Each Party shall permit returns in kind relating to a covered investment to be made as authorised or specified in a w ritten agreement between 
the Party and a covered investment or an investor of the other Party.   
 4.  Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 3, a Party may prevent or delay 
a transfer through the equitable, non- discriminatory, and good faith 
application of i ts law
16 relating to:  
 
(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;   
 
(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options, or derivatives;  
 
(c) criminal or penal offences;   
 
(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities; or  
 
(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative proceedings.   
                                                 
15  For greater certainty, contributions to capital include the initial contrib ution.  
16  For greater certainty, this Article does not preclude the equitable, non -discriminatory, and 
good faith application of a Party’s law relating to its social security, public retirement, or 
compulsory savings programmes.  
  
5.  Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may restrict transfers of returns in kind in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict such transfers under this Agreement, including as set out in paragraph 4.   
 6.  For greater certainty, nothing in this Articl e shall be construed to 
prevent a Party from applying its law relating to the imposition of economic sanctions in good faith.   
  
Article 13. 11 
Performance Requirements  
 1.  Neither Party shall, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other 
disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non- Party 
in its territory, impose or enforce any requirement, or enforce any 
commitment or undertaking:
17  
 
(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;  
 
(b)  to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;  
 
(c) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced in 
its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory;  
 (d) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the 
volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with the investment;  
 (e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that the investment produces or supplies by relating those sales in any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings; 
 (f) to transfer a particular technology, a production process, or other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory; 
 (g) to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party the goods that the investment produces or the services that it supplies to a specific regional market or to the world market;  
 
                                                 
17  For greater certainty , a condition for the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage 
referred to in paragraph 2 does not constitute a “requirement” or a “commitment or undertaking” for the purposes of paragraph 1.  
 (h) 
 
(i) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to, in its territory, technology of the Party or of a person of the Party;
18 or 
 
(ii) that prevents the purchase or use of, or the according of a preference to, in its territory, a particular technology;  
 
(i) to locate the regional or world headquarters of an enterprise in its territory;  
 
(j) to achieve a given level or value of research and development in its territory ;  
 
(k) to adopt:   
(i) a rate or amount of royalty below a certain level; or 
 (ii) a given duration of the term of a licence contract ,
19 
 with regard to any licence contract in existence at the time the requirement is imposed or enforced, or any commitment or undertaking is enforced, or with regard to any future licence contract freely entered i nto between the investment and a 
person in the territory of the Party, if the requirement is imposed or enforced or the commitment or undertaking is enforced, in a manner that constitutes a direct interference with that licence contract by an exercise of a  non- judicial 
governmental authority of the Party.
20  
 2.  Neither Party shall condition the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposi tion of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non- Party 
in its territory, on compliance with any requirement: 
 
(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;  
 (b) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced in its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory;  
                                                 
18  For the purposes of this Article, the term “technology of  the Party or of a person of the 
Party” includes technology that is owned by the Party or a person of the Party, and technology for which the Party or a person of the Party holds an exclusive licence.  
19 A “licence contract”  referred  to in this subparagrap h means  any contract  concerning the 
licensing  of technology,  a production  process,  or other  proprietary knowledge.   
20 For greater certainty, subparagraph (k) does not apply when the licence contract is concluded 
between the investment and a Party.  
  
(c) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with the investment; or   
  (d) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that the investment produces or supplies by relating those sales in any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings.  
 3.  Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to preve nt a Party from 
conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, on compliance with a requirement to locate production, supply a service, train or employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.  
 4.  Subparagraphs 1(f), 1(h), and 1(k) do not apply:    
(a) if a Party authorises use of an intellectual property right in accordance with of the TRIPS Agreement, or to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary information that fall within the scope of, and are consistent with, Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreem ent; or  
 (b) if the requirement is imposed or enforced, or the commitment 
or undertaking is enforced, by a court or administrative tribunal 
or by a competition authority to prevent or remedy a restriction or distortion of competition after a judicial or a dministrative 
process conducted pursuant to a Party’s competition law.
21  
 5.  Subparagraph 1( k) does not apply if the requirement is imposed or 
enforced, or the commitment or undertaking is enforced, by a tribunal as equitable remuneration under the Party’ s copyright law.  
 6.  Subparagraphs 1(a) through 1(c), 2(a) , and 2(b) do not apply to 
qualification requirements for goods or services with respect to export promotion and foreign aid programs.  
  7.  Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f) through 1( j), 2(a) and 2(b) do not apply 
to government procurement.  
 8.  Subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b) do not apply to requirements imposed by 
an importing Party relating to the content of goods necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or preferential quotas.  
                                                 
21  The Parties recognise that a patent does not necessarily confer market power.  
  
9. Subparagrap hs (1)(h) and (1)(k) shall not be construed to prevent a 
Party from adopting or maintaining measures to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or in a manner that constitutes a disguised restriction on international trade or investment. 
 
10.  For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed to prevent a Party, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non- Party 
in its territory, from imposing or enforcing a requirement, or enforcing a commitment or undertaking, to employ or train workers in its territory provided that the  employment or training does not require the transfer 
of a particular technology, production process, or other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory.   
 
11.  For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to any 
commitment, undertaking, or requirement other than those set out in 
those paragraphs.  
 12.  This Article does not preclude enforcement of any commitment, undertaking, or requirement between private parties, if a Party did not impose or require the commitment, undertaking, or requirement.  
  
Article 13.12 
Senior Management and Boards of Directors  
 
A Party shall not require that an enterprise of that Party that is 
a covered investment appoint to senior management or board of director positio ns natural persons of a particular nationality or who are 
resident in the territory of that Party.   
  
Article 13.13 
Non-Conforming Measures  
 1.  Article 13.4 (Market Access), Article 13. 5 (National Treatment), 
Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment), Article 13.1 1 
(Performance Requirements) and Article 13.1 2 (Senior Management 
and Boards of Directors) do not apply to:   
 
(a) any existing non- conforming measure that is maintained by a 
Party at:  
 (i) the central level of government, as set out by that Party 
in its Schedule to Annex I  (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures for Services and Investment) ;  
 (ii) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I  (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures for Services and Investment); or 
 (iii) a local level of government;  
 
(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming  
measure referred to in subparagraph (a); or  
 (c) an amendment to any non- conforming measure referred to in 
subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment , with Article 13. 5 (National 
Treatment), Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment), 
Article 13.1 1 (Performance Requirements) or Article  13.12 
(Senior Management and Boards of Directors).  
 2.  Article 13. 4 (Market Access), Article 13. 5 (National Treatment), 
Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment), Article 13.1 1 
(Performance Requirements) and Article 13.1 2 (Senior Management 
and Boards of Directors) do not apply to any measure that a Party 
adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex II  (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures for Ser vices and Investment) .  
 3.  If a Party considers that a non -conforming measure applied by a 
regional level of government of the other Party, as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(ii), creates a material impediment to investment in relation to the former Party, it may request consultations with regard to that measure.  The Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging information on the operation of the measure and to considering whether further steps are necessary and appropriate.
22  
 4.  N either Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of entry 
into force of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule to Annex II  
(Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment) , require an investor of the other Party, by reason of its 
nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.   
 
                                                 
22  For greater certainty, a Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding a 
non-conforming measure applied by a central level of government, as referred to in 
subparagraph 1(a)(i).  
 5.  Article 13. 5 (National Treatment) and Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured-
Nation Treatm ent) do not apply to any measure that falls within Article 
5 of the TRIPS Agreement, and any measure that is covered by an 
exception to, or derogation from, the obligations imposed by Article 15.8 (National Treatment) of Chapter 15 (Intellectual Property),  or by 
Article 3 or Article 4 of the TRIPS Agreement.   
 6.  Article 13. 4 (Market Access), Article 13. 5 (National Treatment), 
Article 13. 6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment) and Article 13. 12 
(Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do not apply to:   
 
(a) government procurement; or   
 
(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government supported loans, guarantees, and insurance.  
  7.  For greater certainty, any amendments or modifications to a Party’s 
Schedules to Annex I or Annex II  (Sched ules of Non-Conforming 
Measures for Services and Investment) , pursuant to this Article, shall 
be made in accordance with Article 32.2 (Amendments  – Final 
Provisions ).  
 
8.  Australia shall work towards further liberalisation  and transparency  as 
regards sub paragraphs 1( h) through (k) of Article 13.11 (Performance 
Requirements).  To that end, Australia shall conduct consultations at the regional level of government in respect of subparagraphs 1( h) 
through (k) of Article 13.1 1 (Performance Requirements), against the 
measures maintained at the regional level of government in respect of which entry 45 in its Schedule to Annex I (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures for Services and Investment) and entry 30 in its 
Schedule to Annex II (Schedules of Non-Confor ming Measures for 
Services and Investment) have been made.  
 9.  Australia shall endeavour to conclude the consultations referred to in paragraph 8 within nine months of entry into force of this Agreement.   Following the conclusion of these consultations, Australia shall:  
 
(a)  promptly notify the United Kingdom of the outcome of the consultations; and  
 (b)  unless the Parties agree otherwise, amend accordingly 
Australia’s Schedule to Annex I (Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures for Services and Investmen t) and its 
Schedule to Annex II  (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures 
for Services and Investment) , as soon as is reasonably 
practicable.  
 Article 13. 14 
Subrogation  
  
If a Party, or any agency, institution, statutory body, or 
corporation designated by the Party, makes a payment to an investor of 
the Party under a guarantee, a contract of insurance, or other form of indemnity that it has entered into with respect to a co vered investment, 
the other Party in whose territory the covered investment was made shall recognise the subrogation or transfer of any rights the investor would have possessed under this Chapter with respect to the covered investment but for the subrogation, and the investor shall be precluded from pursuing these rights to the extent of the subrogation.  
  
Article 13.15 
Special Formalities and Information Requirements  
  
1.  Nothing in Article 13.5 (National Treatment) shall be construed to 
prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes 
special formalities in connection with a covered investment, such as a residency requirement for registration or a requirement that a covered  
investment be legally constituted under the law of the Party, provided that these formalities do not materially impair the protections afforded by the Party to investors of the other Party and covered investments pursuant to this Chapter.  
   2.  Notwiths tanding Article 13.5 (National Treatment) and Article 13. 6 
(Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment), a Party may require an investor of 
the other Party or its covered investment  to provide information 
concerning that investment solely for informational or statistical purposes.  The Party shall protect such information that is confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the investor or the covered investment.  Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the equitable and good faith application of its law.  
  
Article 13.16 
Denial of Benefits
23 
 
A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of 
the other Party that is an enterpris e of that other Party and to 
investments of that investor if persons of a non -Party own or control 
the enterprise and the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non- Party or a person of the non- Party that prohibit 
                                                 
23 For greater certainty, the benefits of this Chapter may be denied at any time before or after 
an investment is made.  
 transactions with the enterprise or that would be violated or 
circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the 
enterprise or to its investments.   
  
Article 13.17 
Investment and Environmental, Health, and other Regulatory 
Objectives  
 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party 
from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this Chapter that it considers appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its territory is undertaken in a m anner sensitive 
to environmental, health, or other regulatory objectives.  
  
Article 13. 18 
Investment and the Environment  
 1.  The Parties recall the provisions of this Agreement that are applicable to promoting mutually supportive investment and environme ntal 
outcomes and that are consistent with the sovereign right of each Party to set its levels of environmental protection, including as set out in the relevant provisions, exceptions, and exclusions of this Chapter, of Annex I (Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment ) and Annex II ( Schedules of Non -Conforming Measures  
for Services and Investment), of Chapter 31 (General Provisions and Exceptions), and of Chapter 22 (Environment). 
 2.  The Parties further recall that such provisions , exceptions, and 
exclusions include those applicable to:  
 
(a) maintaining and effectively enforcing domestic environmental law and policies; 
 (b) recognising that it is inappropriate to waive or derogate from 
environmental law to encourage investment;    
 (c) affirming commitments under multilateral environmental agreements;  
 (d) supporting the transition to low carbon and climate resilient economies; and  
 (e) encouraging investment in environmental goods and services.  
 Article 13.19 
Corporate Social Responsibility  
 
Each Party reaffirms the importance of encouraging investors 
operating within its territory or subject to its jurisdiction voluntarily to 
incorporate into their internal policies those internationally recognised standards, guidelines, and principles of corporate social responsibility that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party, such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises done at Paris on 21 June 1976 and the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights done at Geneva on 16 June 2011.13A-1 
 ANNEX 13A 
 
CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW  
 
The Parties confirm their shared understanding that “customary 
international law ” generally and as specifically referenced in Article 
13.7 (Minimum Standard of Treatment) results from a general and 
consistent practice of States that they follow from a sense of legal 
obligation.  The customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens ref ers to all customary international law principles 
that protect the investments of aliens.13B-1 
 ANNEX 13B 
 
EXPROPRIATION 
 
  The Parties confirm their shared understanding that:  
 1.  An action or a series of actions by a Party cannot constitute an expropriation unless it interferes with a tangible or intangible property right or property interest in an investment.   
  2.  Paragraph 1 of Article 13. 9 (Expropriation and Compensation)  
addresses two situations.  The first is direct expropriation, in which an investment is nationalised or otherwise directly expropriated through formal transfer of title or outright seizure.  
  3.  The second situation addressed by paragraph 1 of Article 1 3.9 
(Expropriation and Compensation) is indirect expropriation, in which 
an action or series of actions by a Party has an effect equivalent to 
direct expropriation without formal transfer of title or outright seizure.  
 
(a) The determination of whether an action or series of actions by a Party, in a specific fact situation, constitutes an indirect expropriation, requires a case -by-case, fact -based inquiry that 
considers, among other factors:   (i) the economic impact of the g overnment action, 
although the fact that an action or series of actions by a Party has an adverse effect on the economic value of an investment, standing alone, does not establish that an indirect expropriation has occurred;   
 (ii) the extent to which the  government action interferes 
with distinct, reasonable investment -backed 
expectations;
24 and  
 (iii) the character of the government action.   
 
(b) Non-discriminatory regulatory actions by a Party that are 
designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as public health,
25 safety , and the environment, 
                                                 
24  For greater certainty, whether an investor’s investment -backed expectations are reasonable 
depends, to the extent relevant, on factors such as whether the government provided the investor with binding written assurances and the nature and extent of gover nmental regulation 
or the potential for government regulation in the relevant sector.  
25  For greater certainty and without limiting the scope of this subparagraph, regulatory actions 
to protect public health include, among others, such measures with respe ct to the regulation, 
pricing and supply of, and reimbursement for, pharmaceuticals (including biological products), diagnostics, vaccines, medical devices, gene therapies and technologies, health-related aids and appliances, and blood and blood- related pr oducts.13B-2 
 do not constitute indirect expropriations, except in rare 
circumstances.13C-1 
 ANNEX 13C 
 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
1.  A decision or requirement under Australia’s Foreign Investment Framework, which comprises Australia’s Foreign Investment Policy; Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act 1975 (Cth); Foreign 
Acquisitions and Takeovers Regulation 2015 (Cth); Foreign 
Acquisitions and Takeovers Fees Imposition Act 2015 (Cth); Foreign 
Acquisitions and Takeovers Fees Imposition Regulation 2020 (Cth); 
Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998 (Cth); and Ministerial 
Statements, shall not be subject to dispute set tlement under Chapter 30 
(Dispute Settlement).  
   2.  A decision or requirement by the United Kingdom under the National Security and Investment Act 2021 or on public interest grounds under 
Part 3 of the Enterprise Act 2002, shall not be subject to dispute 
settlement under Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement).  CHAPTER 14 
 
DIGITAL TRADE  
 
 
Article 14.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“cipher” or “cryptographic algorithm” means a mathematical procedure or formula for combining a key with plaintext to create a ciphertext;   “commercial information and communication technology product ” 
(commercial ICT product) means a product that is designed for commercial applications and whose intended function is information processing and communication by electronic means, including transmission and display, or electronic processing applied to dete rmine or record physical phenomena, or 
to control physical processes;  “computing facilities” means computer  servers and storage devices for 
processing or storing information for commercial use;   “covered person” means:   
(a) a covered investment as defined in Article 1.4 ( General 
Definitions – Initial Provisions and General Definitions) ; 
 
(b) an investor of a Party as defined in Article 13.1 (Definitions – 
Investment); or  
 
(c) a service supplier of a Party as defined in Artic le 8.1 
(Definitions – Cross -Border Trade in Services ),  
 but does not include a financial service supplier as defined in Article 9.1 
(Definitions  – Financial Services);  
 “cryptography” means the principles, means or methods for the transformation of data in order to conceal or disguise its content, prevent its undetected modification or prevent its unauthorised use, and is limited to the transformation of information using one or more secret parameters, for example, crypto variables or associated key management;  
 “electronic authentication” means an electronic process that enables the confirmation of:    
(a) the electronic identification of a person; or  
 (b) the origin and integr ity of data in electronic form; 
 
“electronic invoicing” means the automated creation, exchange , and 
processing of requests for payments between suppliers and buyers using a structured digital format;  “electronic signature” means data in electronic form that is in, affixed to, or 
logically associated with , an electronic  data message that may be used to 
identify the signatory in relation to the data message and indicate the signatory ’s approval of the information contained in the data message;
1 
 “electronic transmission” or “transmitted electronically” means a transmission made using any electromagnetic means, including by photonic means;  
 “electronic trust service” means an electronic service which may include :  
 
(a) the creation, verification , and validation of electronic 
signatures, electronic seals, electronic time stamps, electronic registered delivery services, and certificates related to those 
services;  
 
(b) the creation, verification , and validation of certificates for 
website authentication; or  
 
(c) the preservation of electronic signatures, seals , or certificates 
related to those services;  
 “encryption” means the conversion of data (plaintext) into a form that cannot be easily understood without subsequent re -conversion (ciphertext) th rough 
the use of a cryptographic algorithm and the appropriate cryptographic key;    “enterprise” means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.4 (General 
Definitions  – Initial Provisions and General De finitions ) and a branch of an 
enterprise ;  
 “key” means a parameter used in conjunction with a cryptographic algorithm that determines its operation in such a way that a person with knowledge of the key can reproduce or reverse the operation, but a person without knowledge of the key cannot;  “personal information” means any information, including data, about an identified or identifiable natural person;   
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, nothing in this provision prevents a Party from according greater legal effect 
to an electronic  signature  that satisfies certain requirements, such as indicating that the electronic data 
message has not been altered or verifying the  identity of the signatory.  
 “trade administration documents” means forms issued or controlled by a 
Party that must be completed by or for an importer or exporter in connection 
with the import or export of goods; and   “unsolicited commercial electronic message” means an electronic message
2 
which is sent for commercial or marketing purposes to an electronic address,  
without the consent of the recipient  or despite the explicit rejection of the 
recipient , via a public telecommunications service.3 
  
Article 14.2 
Scope and General Provisions  
 1. This Chapter applies to measures of a Party  affecting trade enabled  or 
facilitated  by electronic means.  
 2. This Chapter does not apply to:   
(a) audio- visual  services;  or  
 
(b) government procurement, except for Article 14.5 (Conclusion of 
Contracts by Electronic Means) and 14.6 (Electronic  Authentication  
and Electronic Trust Services) . 
 3. Article 14.10  (Cross -Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means) 
and Article 14.11 (Location of Computing Facilities) do not apply to a 
measure to the extent that the measure is not subject to an obligation in Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services) or Chapter 13 (Investment) by 
reason of: 
 
(a) Article 8.7 (Non -Conforming Measures  – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services ) or Article 13.13 ( Non-Conforming Measures – Investment) ; 
or  
 
(b) any exception that is applicable to that obligation. 
 4. Article 14.10  (Cross -Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means ), 
Article 14.11  (Location of Computing Facilities) , Article 14.18 (Source 
Code), and Article 14.19 (Commercial Information and Communication 
Technology Products that Use Cryptography) shall not apply to information held or processed by or on behalf of a Party, or measures related to such 
information, including measures related to its collection.  
 
                                                            
2 For greater certainty, an electronic message includes electronic mail and text (Short Message 
Service) and multimedia (Multimedia Message Service) messages.  
3 For Australia, an unsolicited commercial electronic message does not include a commercial 
electronic message that is a designated commercial electronic message under the Spam Act 2003  
(Cth), as amended from time to time, or any successor legislation.  
  
Article 14. 3 
Customs Duties  
  
1. Neither Party shall impose customs duties on electronic transmissions, including content transmitted electronically, between a person of a Party and a person of the other Party.  
  2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not preclude a Party from imposi ng 
internal taxes, fees or other charges on electronic transmissions, including content transmitted electronically, provided that those taxes, fees or charges are imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.  
  
Article 14.4 
Domestic Electronic Transactions Framework  
 
1. Each Party shall maintain a legal framework governing electronic transactions consistent with the principles of the UNCITRAL  Model Law on 
Electronic Commerce 1996  done at New York on 12 June 1996 or the United 
Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts  done at New York on 23 November 2005.   
 2. Each Party shall endeavour to : 
 
(a) avoid any unnecessary regulatory burden on electronic transactions; and  
 
(b) facilitate input by interested persons in the development of its legal framework for electronic transactions.  
 3. The Parties recognise the importance of developing mechanisms to facilitate the use of electronic transferable records.  To this end, in developing such 
mechanisms, the Parties shall endeavour to take into account, as appropriate, relevant model legislative texts developed and adopted by international bodies, such as the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Transferable 
Records 2017 done at New York on 13 July 2017.  
  
Article 14.5 
Conclusion of Contracts by Electronic Means  
 1. Except in circumstances otherwise provided for in its law , each Party shall 
ensure that:  
 
(a) its legal framework allows for contracts to be concluded by electronic means; and  
 (b) its law neither create s obstacles for the use of electronic contracts nor 
results in electronic contracts being deprived of legal effect, 
enforceability , or validity, solely on the ground that the contract has 
been made by electronic means.  
 2. The Parties recognise the import ance of transparency for minimising barriers 
to the use of electronic contracts in digital trade.  To that end, each Party 
shall:  
 
(a) promptly publish the circumstances referred to in paragraph 1 on a single official website hosted by the central level of government; and 
 
(b) review these circumstances with a view to reducing them over  time.  
  
Article 14. 6 
Electronic Authentication and Electronic Trust Services  
 1. Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its law, neither Party shall deny the legal validity or effect, or admissibility as evidence in legal proceedings, of an electronic document or an electronic signature solely on the ground that it is in electronic form. 
 2. Neither Party shall adopt or maintain measures that would:  
 
(a) prohi bit parties to an electronic transaction from mutually 
determining the appropriate electronic authentication methods for that transaction; or  
 
(b) prevent parties to an electronic transaction from being able to prove to judicial or administrative authorities that the use of electronic authentication in that transaction complies with the applicable legal requirements.  
 3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that for a particular category of transactions, the method of electronic authentication is certified by an authority accredited in accordance with its law or meets certain performance standards which shall be objective, transparent , and non-
discriminatory and shall only relate to the specific characteristics of the category of transactions concerned.  
 4. The Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic authentication and the mutual recognition of electronic authentication. 
 5. To the extent provided for in its law, a Party shall apply paragraphs 1 through 4 to other electronic processes or means of facilitating or enabling electronic transactions, such as electronic seals, electronic time stamps, electronic registered d elivery services, or electronic trust services.  
 Article 14. 7 
Digital Identities  
 
1. Recognising that cooperation between the Parties on digital identities will 
increase regional and global connectivity, and recognising that each Party may take different legal and technical approaches to digital identities, the Parties shall pursue the dev elopment of mechanisms to promote compatibility 
between their respective digital identity regimes.   
 2. To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to facilitate initiatives to promote such compatibility, which may include: 
 
(a) developing appropriate framew orks and common standards to foster 
technical interoperability between each Party’s implementation of digital identities;  
 
(b) supporting the development of international frameworks on digital identity regimes; 
 
(c) implementing use cases for the mutual recognition of digital identities; and  
 
(d) exchanging knowledge and expertise on best practices relating to digital identity policies and regulations, technical implementation, security standards, and the promotion of the use of digital identities. 
  
Article 14.8 
Paperless Trading  
  1. Each Party shall endeavour to : 
 
(a) make trade administration documents available to the public in electronic form ; and 
 
(b) accept a trade administration document submitted electronically as 
the legal equivalent of the paper version of that document.  
 2. The Parties shall cooperate bilaterally and in international fora, where appropriate, to promote acceptance of electronic versions of trade administration documents and on other matters related to paperless trading . 
 3. In developing initiatives concerning the use of paperless trading, the Parties 
shall endeavour to take into account the principles and guidelines of relevant international bodies.  
 Article 14.9  
Electronic Invoicing  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of electronic invoicing to increase the efficiency, accuracy , and reliability of commercial transactions.  Each Party 
also recognises the benefits of ensuring that the systems used for electronic invoicing within its territory are interoperable with the systems used for 
electronic invoicing in the other Party’s territory.  
 2. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that the implementation of measures related to electronic invoicing in its territory supports cross -border 
interoperability between the  Parties’ electronic invoicing frameworks.  To 
this end, the Parties shall take into account international frameworks when developing measures related to electronic invoicing. 
 3. The Parties recognise the economic importance of promoting the global adopti on of interoperable electronic invoicing systems.  To this end, the 
Parties shall endeavour to share best practices and collaborate on promoting the adoption of interoperable systems for electronic invoicing.  
  
Article 14.10 
Cross- Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means  
  1. The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements concerning the transfer of information by electronic means.  
 2. Neither Party shall prohibit or restrict the cross -border transfer of infor mation 
by electronic means, including personal information, if this activity is for the conduct of the business of a covered person.  
 3. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures inconsistent with paragraph 2 to a chieve a legitimate public policy 
objective, provided that the measure:  
 
(a) is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or a disguised restriction on trade; and   
 
(b) does not impose restrictions on transfers of information greater than are required to achieve the objective.  
  
Article 14.11 
Location of Computing Facilities  
 1. The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements regarding the use of computing facilities, including  
 requirements that seek to ensure the security and confidentiality of 
communications.   
 2. Neither Party shall require a covered person to use or locate computing facilities in that Party’s territory as a condition for conducting business in that territory.  
 3. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures inconsistent with paragraph 2 to achieve a legitimate public policy 
objective, provided that the measure: 
 
(a) is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or a disguised restriction on trade; and   
 
(b) does not impose restrictions on the use or location of computing facilities greater than are required to achieve the objective.  
  
Article 14.12 
Personal Information Protection  
  1. The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting  the 
personal information of users of digital trade and the contribution that this makes to enhancing consumer confidence in digital trade. 
 2. To this end, each Party shall adopt or maintain a legal framework that provides for the protection of the personal information of the users of digital trade.  In the development of its legal framework for the protection of personal information, each Party shall take into account principles and guidelines of relevant international bodies, including collection limitation, data quality, purpose specification, use limitation, security safeguards, transparency, individual participation, and accountability.
4 
  3. Each Party shall adopt non- discriminatory practices in protecting users of 
digital trade from personal information protection violations occurring within its jurisdiction.  
 4. Each Party shall publish information on the personal information protections it provides to users of digital trade, including how:  
 
(a) a natural person can pursue a remedy; and  
 
(b) an enterprise can comply with any legal requirements. 
                                                            
4 For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the obligation in this paragraph by adopting or 
maintaining measures such as comprehensive privacy, personal information, or personal data 
protection laws, sector -specific laws covering data protection or pri vacy, or laws that provide for the 
enforcement of voluntary undertakings by enterprises relating to data protection or privacy.  
 5. Each Party shall encourage enterprises in its territory to publish, including on 
the Internet, their policies and procedures related to protection of personal 
information. 
 6. Recognising that the Parties may take different legal approaches to protecting personal information, each Party shall encourage the development of mechanisms to promote compatibility between these different regimes.  These mechanisms may include the recognition of regulatory outcomes, whether accorded autonomously or by mutual arrangement, or broader international frameworks.  To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to excha nge information on any such mechanisms applied in their jurisdictions 
and explore ways to extend these or other suitable arrangements to promote compatibility between them. 
  
Article 14.13 
Open Government Data  
 1. For the purposes of this Article, government information means non-proprietary information, including data, held by the central level of government. 
 2. The Parties recognise that facilitating public access to and use of government information fosters economic and social development, competitiveness and innovation. 
 3. To the extent that a Party chooses to make government information available to the public, it shall endeavour to ensure:  
 
(a) that the information is appropriately anonymised, contains descriptive metadata, is in a machine- readable and open format, and can be 
searched, retrieved, used, reused, and redistributed; and  
 
(b) to the extent practicable, that the information is made available in a spatially enabled format with reliable, easy to use, and freely available application programming interfaces and is regularly updated.  
 4. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to identify ways in which each Party can expand access to and the use of government information that the Party 
has made public, with a view to enhancing and generating business and research opportunities, especially for SMEs.  
 Article 14. 14 
Data Innovation 
 
1. The Parties recognise that digitalisation and the u se of data in digital trade 
promote economic growth.  To support the cross -border transfer of 
information by electronic means and promote data -driven innovation in 
digital trade, the Parties further recognise the need to create an environment that enables and supports, and is conducive to, experimentation and innovation, including through the use of regulatory sandboxes where applicable.  
 2. The Parties shall endeavour to support data innovation through:  
(a) collaborating on data -sharing projects, including projects involving 
researchers, academics and industry, using regulatory sandboxes as required to demonstrate the benefits of the cross- border transfer of 
information by electronic means;  
 
(b) cooperating on the development of policies and standards for data 
mobility, including consumer data portability; and 
 
(c) sharing research and industry practices related to data innovation. 
  
Article 14.15  
Open Internet Access  
 
Subject to their applicable policies, laws , and regulations, the Parties  
recognise the benefits of consumers
5 in their territories having the ability to: 
 
(a) access, distribute , and use services and applications of their choice 
available on the Internet, subject to reasonable, transparent , and non-
discriminatory network management;  
 
(b) connect devices of their choice to the Internet, provided that these devices do not harm the network; and  
 
(c) access information on the network management practices of their Internet access service supplier. 
  
Article 14.16 
Online Consumer Protection  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of transparent and effective measures that enhance consumer confidence and trust in digital trade. 
                                                            
5 For the purposes of this Article, “ consumer ” means any natural or juridical person using the internet 
for personal, trade, business , or professional purposes.  
 2. E ach Party shall maintain consumer protection laws and regulations that 
proscribe: 
 
(a) misleading , deceptive, and  fraudulent commercial practices; and  
 
(b) unconscionable conduct or unfair commercial practices,  
 
that cause harm , or potential harm , to consumers engaged in digital trade .6  
 
3. The Parties recognise the importance of, and where appropriate shall promote, cooperation between their respective national consumer protection agencies or other relevant bodies on activities aimed at online co nsumer 
protection.
7 
 4. The Parties further recognise the importance of improving awareness of and providing access to consumer redress mechanisms to protect consumers engaged in digital trade, including for consumers of a Party transacting with  
suppliers of the other Party. 
 5. The Parties recognise the benefits of dispute resolution mechanisms in facilitating the resolution of disputes regarding electronic commerce transactions, including alternative  dispute resolution mechanisms. 
  
Article 14.17 
Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Messages  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures regarding unsolicited commercial electronic messages that:  
 
(a) require a supplier  of unsolicited commercial electronic messages to 
facilitate the ability of a recipient to prevent ongoing reception of those messages;  
 
(b) require the consent, as specified according to its  laws and regulations , 
of recipients to receive commercial electronic messages; or   
 
(c) otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that commercial electronic messages are clearly identifiable as such, clearly disclose on whose behalf they are made, and 
                                                            
6 For the purposes of this Article, the term “ engaged” includes the pre -transaction phase of online 
commercial activities.  
7 To this end, the  Parties affirm that cooperation under Article 17. 6 (Cooperation on Competition 
Policy and Consumer Protection – Competition Policy  and Consumer Protection)  includes 
cooperation with respect to online commercial activities.  
 contain the necessa ry information to enable recipients  to request cessation 
free of charge and at any time.  
 
3. Each Party shall provide recourse against suppliers of unsolicited commercial 
elect ronic messages that do  not comply with the measures adopted or 
maintained pursua nt to paragraphs 1 and 2.   
 4. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.  
  
Article 14.18 
Source Code  
 1. Neither Party shall require the transfer of, or access to, source code
8 of 
software owned by a person of the other  Party, as a condition for the import, 
distribution, sale , or use of that software, or of a product containing that 
software, in its territory.  
 2. This Article does not preclude a government agency, regulatory body, 
administra tive tribunal , or judicial authority of a Party , or a designated 
conformity assessment body operating in the Party’s territory,  from requiring 
a person of the other Party to preserve and make available
9 the source code 
of software for an investigation, inspection, examination, enforcement action, 
or judicial or administrative proceeding, subject to safeguards against 
unauthorised disclosure.  
 3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to a remedy imposed, enforced , or adopted  in 
accordance with a Party’s law following an investigation, inspection, examination, enforcement action, or judicial or administrative proceeding. 
  4. Paragraph 1 does not apply to the voluntary transfer of, or granting of access to, source code by a person of the other Party on a commercial basis, such as 
in the context of a freely negotiated contract. 
 5. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 shall prevent a person of a Party from licensing its software on a free and open- source basis.  
     
                                                            
8 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, a reference to “source code” includes an 
algorithm embedded in the source code, but does not include the expression of the algorithm in any other form, including in prose.  
9 The Parties understand that  this making available shall not be construed to negatively affect the 
status of the source code of software as a trade secret .  
 Article 14.19 
Commercial Information and Communication Technology Products that Use 
Cryptography 
 
1. Neither Party shall impose or maintain a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that requires a manufacturer or supplier of a commercial information and communication technology ( ICT) product that 
uses cryptography,
10 as a condition of the manufacture, sale, distribution, 
import, or use of the ICT product,11 to: 
 
(a) transfer or provide access to a particular technology, production process, or other information, for example, a private key or other 
secret parameter, algorithm specification , or other design detail, that 
is proprietary to the manufacturer or supplier and relates to the cryptography in the product to the  Party or a person in the Party’s 
territory;
12  
 
(b) partner or otherwise cooperate with a person in the Party’s territory in the development, manufacture, sale, distribution, import, or use of the 
ICT product; or 
 
(c) use or integrate a particular cipher or cryptographic algorithm .  
 2. This Article does not apply to:  
(a) a requirement that a Party adopts or maintains relating to access to networks, including user devices, that are owned or controlled by that Party, including those of central banks;  
 
(b) measures by a Party adopted or maintained pursuant to supervisory, investigatory, or examination authority relating to financ ial service 
suppliers or financial markets; or  
 
(c) the manufacture, sale, distribution, import , or use of the commercial 
ICT product by or for a Party. 
 3. For greater certainty, this Article shall not be construed to prevent a Party’s law enforcement authorities from requiring service suppliers using encryption they control to provide, pursuant to that Party’s legal procedures, access to encrypted and unencrypted communications.  
 
                                                            
10 For the purposes of this Article, a “commercial ICT product” is a good and, for greater certainty, 
does not include a financial instrument.  
11 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, measures of a Party affecting trade enabled 
or facilitated by electronic  means  includes measures relating to the development, manufacture, sale, 
distribution, import , or use of ICT products.  
12 For greater certainty, this Article does not affect the rights and obligations of a Party under  Article 
14.18 (Source Code).  
 Article 14.  20 
Cybersecurity  
 
1. The Parties recognise that threats to cybersecurity undermine confidence in digital trade.  The Parties further recognise the importance of:  
 
(a) workforce development in the area of cybersecurity, including possible initiatives relating to mutual recognition of qualifications, diversity, and equality; and 
 
(b) enhancing the cybersecurity capability of businesses, including SMEs, and enabling greater cybersecurity resilience within industry.  
 
2. The Parties shall endeavour to:  
 
(a) build the capabilities of their respective national entities responsible 
for cybersecurity incident response, taking into account the evolving nature of cybersecurity threats;  
 (b) strengthen existing collaboration mechanisms for cooperating to anticipate, identify, and mitigate  malicious intrusions or 
dissemination of malicious code that affect electronic networks, and use those mechanisms to swiftly address cybersecurity incidents; and  
 
(c) maintain a dialogue on matters related to cybersecurity, including for 
the sharing of information and experiences for awareness and best practices.  
 3. Given the evolving nature of cybersecurity threats, the Parties recognise that 
risk-based approaches may be more effective than prescriptive approaches in 
addressing those threats.  Accordingly, where appropriate, each Party shall endeavour to employ, and shall encourage enterprises within its jurisdiction to use, risk- based approaches that rely on open and transparent cybersecurity 
standards and risk management best practices to identify and protect against cybersecurity risks and to detect, respond to, and recover from cybersecurity events.  
 
 
Article 14.21  
Cooperation 
 1. Recognising the global nature of digital trade, the Parties shall endeavour to:  
 
(a) work together to address  challenges  for SMEs in the use of  digital 
trade;  
 (b) exchange information and share experiences and best practices on 
laws, regulations, policies, enforcement , and compliance regarding 
digital trade, including:  
 
(i) personal information protection;  
 
(ii) online consumer protection;  
 
(iii) unsolicited commercial electronic messages;  
 
(iv) cybersecurity; 
 
(v) electronic authentication and electronic trust services;  
 
(vi) digital government; and 
 
(vii) electronic contracts;  
 
(c) exchange information and share views on consumer access to 
products and services offered online between the Parties;  
 
(d) participate actively in multilateral fora,  including the WTO, to 
promote the development of international frameworks for digital trade, including in relation to the development and adoption of relevant international standards;  
 
(e) work together in areas of mutual interest relating to the development and application of standards and conformity assessment procedures 
with a view to facilitating digital trade;  
 (f) encourage development by the private sector of methods of self -
regulation that foster digital trade , including codes of conduct, model 
contracts, guidelines, and compliance mechanisms ;  
 
(g) collaborate to improve opportunities for each Party’s RegTech enterprises, including through their respective trade promotion agencies and regulators, and in relevant international fora ; and  
 (h) facilitate participation by women in digital trade,  acknowledging the 
objectives in Chapter 24 (Trade and Gender Equality).  
 CHAPTER 15 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
 
 
Section A  
General Provisions 
  
Article 15.1 
Definitions  
 
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:  “Berne Convention” means the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, done at Berne on 9 September 1886, as revised at Paris on 24 July 
1971 and amended on 28 September 1979;  “broadcasting” means the transmission by wire or  wireless means, including by 
satellite, for public reception of sounds or of images and sounds or of the representations thereof, and including transmission of encrypted signals if the means for decrypting are provided to the public by the transmitting broadcasting organisation or with its consent, and “broadcast” shall be construed  accordingly;   
 “Budapest Treaty” means the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure (1977), done a t 
Budapest on 28 April 1977, as amended on 26 September 1980;  “Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health” means the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2), adopted on 14 November 2001;  “fixation” means the embodiment of sounds or moving images or representations thereof, in each case, from which they can be perceived, reproduced or communicated through a device;   “Hague Agreement” means the Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of In dustrial Designs, done at Geneva on 2 July 1999; 
 “intellectual property” refers to all categories of intellectual property that are the subject of Sections 1 through 7 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement;   “Locarno Agreement” means the Locarno Agreement Establishing an International Classification for Industrial Designs, done at Locarno on 8 October 1968, as 
amended on 28 September 1979;  “Madrid Protocol” means the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks, done at Madrid on 27 June 1989;  
  
“Marrakesh Treaty” means the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled, done at Marrakesh on 27 June 2013;  “Nice Agreement” means th e Nice Agreement Concerning the International 
Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks, done at Nice on 15 June 1957;  “Paris Convention” means the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, done a t Paris on 20 March 1883 as revised at Stockholm on 14 July 1967; 
 “PCT” means the Patent Cooperation Treaty , done at Washington on 19 June 1970, 
as amended on 28 September 1979, and modified on 3 February 1984  and on 3 
October 2001;  “performers” means actors, singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in, interpret, or otherwise perform literary or artistic works or expressions of folklore, and “performances” shall be construed accordingly;  “phonogram” means the fixation of the sounds of a performance or of other sounds other than in the form of a fixation incorporated in a cinematographic or other audio-visual work;  “PLT” means the Patent Law Treaty adopted by the WIPO Diplomatic Conference, done at Geneva on 1 June 2000;  “producer of a phonogram” means a person that takes the initiative and has the responsibility for the first fixation of the sounds of a performance or other sounds, or the representations of sounds;   “rights management information” means:   
 
(a) information that identifies a work, performance, or phonogram, the author, performer of the performance, the producer of a phonogram , 
or any other right holder with respect to the work, performance, or phonogram;  
 (b) information about the terms and conditions of use of the work, performance, or phonogram; or  
 (c) any numbers or codes that represent the information described in  
subparagraphs (a) and (b), 
 
when any of these items of information is attached to a copy of the work, performance or phonogram, or  appears in connection with the communication or 
making available of a work, performance, or phonogram to the public;  
  
with respect to copyright and related rights, “ right to authorise or prohibit ” refers to 
exclusive rights;  “Rome Convention” means the Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations , done at Rome on 26 
October 1961;  “Singapore Treaty” means the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, done at Singapore on 27 March 2 006; 
 “TIPRIC” means the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, adopted at Washington on 26 May 1989;   “trade secret” means information that:  
 
(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly of its components, generally known 
among or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question;  
 (b) has commercial value because it is secret; and    
 (c) has been subject to reasonab le steps under the circumstances, by the 
person lawfully in control of the information, to keep it secret; 
 
“trade secret holder” means any person lawfully in control of a trade secret;  
 “UPOV 1991” means the International Convention for the Protection of New 
Varieties of Plants, done at Paris on 2 December 1961, as revised at Geneva on 19 
March 1991;  “WCT” means the WIPO Copyright Treaty, done at Geneva on 20 December 1996;  “WIPO” means the World Intellectual Property Organization;  
 for greater certainty, “ work ” includes a cinematographic work, photographic work, 
and computer program; and  “WPPT” means the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, done at Geneva on 20 December 1996.  2.  For the purposes of Article 15.8 (National Treat ment) and Article 15 .31 
(Procedures for the Recognition and Protection of Geographical Indications):  
 
“a national” means, in respect of the relevant right, a person of a Party that would meet the criteria for eligibility for protection provided for in the  
 agreements listed in Article 15.7 (International Agreements) or the TRIPS 
Agreement.  
 
 
Article 15.2 
Objectives  
 
The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should 
contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations. 
  
Article 15.3 
Principles  
 
1.  A Party may, in formulating or amending its laws and regulations, adopt measures necessary to protect public healt h and nutrition, and to promote the 
public interest in sectors of vital importance to their socio -economic and 
technological development, provided that those measures are consistent with  
the provisions of  this Chapter.  
 2.  Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with  the provisions 
of this Chapter, may be needed to prevent the abuse of intellectual property 
rights by right holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of  technology. 
  
Article 15.4 
Understandings in Respect of this Chapter  
 
Having regard to the underlying public policy objectives of national 
systems, the Parties recognise the need to:  
 
(a) promote innovation and creativity; 
 (b) facilitate the diffusion of information, knowledge, 
technology, culture, and the arts; and  
 (c) foster competition and open and efficient markets, 
 
through their respective intellectual property systems, while respecting the principles of transparency and due process, and taking into account the interests of relevant stakeholders, including right holders, service providers, users, and the general public.  
 Article 15.5 
Nature and Scope of Obligations  
 
1.  The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each 
other under the TRIPS Agreement. 
 2. The Parties recognise the importance of adequate, effective and balanced protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights, while ensuring that measures to enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves  become 
barriers to legitimate trade.  
 3.  Each Party shall give effect to  this Chapter.  A Party may, but shall not be 
obliged to, provide more extensive protection for, or enforcement of, intellectual property rights under its law than is required by thi s Chapter, 
provided that such protection or enforcement does not contravene this Chapter.  Each Party shall be free to determine the appropriate method of 
implementing  this Chapter within its own legal system and practice.  
  
Article 15.6 
Understandings Regarding Certain Public Health Measures  
 
1. The Parties affirm the Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health .  In particular, 
the Parties have reached the following understanding s regarding this Chapter:  
 
(a)  the Parties affirm the right to fully use the flexibilities as duly recognised in the Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health; 
 (b)  the Parties agree that this Chapter does not and should not prevent a Party from taking measures to protect public health; and 
 (c)  the Parties affirm that this Chapter can and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of each Party’ s right to protect 
public health and, in particular, to promote access to medicines for all. 
 
2.  In recognition of the Parties ’ commitment to access to medicines and public  
health, this Chapter does not and should not prevent the effective utilisation of Article 31 bis of the TRIPS Agreement, and the Annex and Appendix to 
the Annex to the TRIPS Agreement . 
 3.  The Parties recognise the importance of contributing to the international efforts to implement Article 31 bis of the TRIPS Agreement, and the Annex 
and Appendix to the Annex to the TRIPS Agreement.  
 Article 15.7 
International Agreements 
 
Each Party affirms that it has ratified or acceded to the following  
agreements:  
 
(a) TRIPS Agreement ; 
 
(b) Paris Convention;  (c) Berne Convention; 
 (d) Rome Convention;  (e) WCT;  
 (f) WPPT;  
 (g) Marrakesh Treaty;  
 (h) Madrid Protocol;  (i) Nice Agreement;  
 (j) Singapore Treaty; 
 (k) Budapest Treaty;  
 
(l) UPOV 1991; 
 
(m) PCT; and  
 
(n) PLT.  
  
Article 15.8 
National Treatment  
 1. In respect of all categories of intellectual property covered in this Chapter, each Party shall accord to nationals of the other Party treatment no less 
favourable than it accords to its own nationals with regard to the protection
1 
of intellectual property rights subject to the exceptions already provided for in, respectively, the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention, the WPPT, and the TIPRIC .  In respect of performers, producers 
                                                            
1 For the purposes of this paragraph, “protection” shall include matters affecting the availability, 
acquisition, scope, maintenance , and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as matters 
affecting the use of intellectual property rights specifically covered by this Chapter.  
 of phonograms and broadcasting organisations, this obligation only applies 
in respect of the rights provided under this Agreement. 
 
2. A Party may derogate from paragraph 1 in relation to its judicial and 
administrative procedures, including requiring a national of the other Party to designate an address for service of process in its territory, or to appoint an agent in its territory, provided that this derogation is:  
 
(a) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with this Chapter; and  
 (b) not applied in a manner that would constitute a disguised restriction on trade. 
 
3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to procedures provided in multilateral agreements concluded under the auspices of WIPO relating to the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights.  
  
Article 15.9 
Transparency  
 
1. Each Party shall endeavour to publish online its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general application concerning the 
protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights. 
 2. Each Party shall, subject to its law, endeavour to publish online information that it makes public concerning applications for trade marks, geographical indications, registered designs, patents, and plant variety rights.
2, 3   
 3. Each Party shall, subject to its law, publish online information that it makes public concerning registered or granted trade marks, geographical indications , designs, patents, and plant variety rights, sufficient to enable the 
public to become acquainted with those registered or granted rights.
4   
  
Article 15.10  
Application of Chapter to Existing Subject Matter and Prior Acts  
 
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, this Chapter gives rise to 
obligations in respect of all subject matter existing at the date of entry into 
force of this Agreement and that is protected on that date in the territory of a 
                                                            
2 For greater certainty, paragraphs 2 and 3 are without prejudice to a Party’s obligations under Article 
15.27 (Electronic Trade Marks System s).   
3 For greater certainty, paragraph 2 does not require a Party to publish online  the entire dossier for the 
relevant application.  
4 For greater certainty, paragraph 3 does not require a Party to publish online the entire dossier for the 
relevant registered or granted intellectual property right.  
 Party where protection is claimed, or that meets or c omes subsequently to 
meet the criteria for protection under this Chapter.  
 
2. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, a Party shall not be required to restore protection to subject matter that on the date  of entry into force of  this 
Agreement has fallen  into the public domain in its territory.  
 3. This Chapter does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts that occurred before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.  
  
Article 15.11  
Exhaustion of Intellectual Property Rights  
 
Nothing in this Agreement prevents a Party from determining 
whether or under what conditions the exhaustion of intellectual property rights applies under its legal system. 
  
Article 15.12  
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural 
Expressions  
 
The Parties affirm their commitment to work together through 
discussion and by the exchange of information at the WIPO 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic 
Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore. 
 
 
Section B  
Cooperation 
  
Article 15.13  
Contact Points for Cooperation  
 
Each Party may designate and notify the other Party of one or more 
contact points for the purpose of cooperation under this Section. 
  
Article 15.14  
Cooperation 
 
The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the subject matter 
covered by this Chapter, including through appropriate coordination, and exchange of information between the relevant agencies of the Parties.  The 
areas of cooperation may include:  
 (a) the establishment of arrangements between each Party’s respective 
collecting societies;  
 
(b) engagement with SMEs regarding the use, protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights which may include  public-
private engagement with SMEs;  
 (c) education and awareness relating to the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights;  
 (d) cooperation on aspects of intellectual property policy and law  with 
the aim of supporting the development and deployment of environmental and low-emissions technologies, clean and renewable 
energy and enabling infrastructure, and energy- efficient goods and 
services;  
 (e) best practices, projects, and programmes aimed at reducing 
intellectual property rights infringement, including: 
 
(i) coordination to prevent exports of counterfeit goods, 
including with other countries; 
 
(ii) sharing of experience of intellectual property rights enforcement between customs, law enforcement and judicial bodies; 
 
(iii) public education and awareness  activities  on the impact of 
intellectual property infringement; and  
 (iv) voluntary stakeholder  initiatives to reduce intellectual 
property infringement , including over the internet; and  
 
(f) activities for improving the international intellectual property regulatory framework.  
  
Article 15.15  
Committee on Intellectual Property Rights  
 1. 
 The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Intellectual Property Rights (“IPR Committee ”), composed of government representatives of each Party.  
 2.  The IPR Committee shall consider matters relating to the implementation and operation of this Chapter, including consultations and reviews  under Articles 
15.32 ( System and Standard of Protection for Geographical Indications ), 
15.33 ( Protection of Geographical Indications ), and 15.34 ( Consultations on 
Geographical Indications).  
 3.  The IPR Committee shall:  
 
(a)  exchange information, pertaining to intellectual property rights 
matters, including how intellectual property protection contributes to innovation, creativity, economic growth, and employment, and this may include information relating to : 
 (i) developments in domestic and international intellectual 
property law and policy; 
 (ii) economic benefits related to trade and other analysis of the contributions arising from the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights;  
 (iii) intellectual property issues particularly relevant to SMEs 
including affordable and accessible justice; science, technology, and innovation activities; and to the generation, transfer, and dissemination of technology; 
 (iv) approaches for reducing the infringement of intellectual property rights, as well as effective strategies for removing the underlying incentives for infringement; and 
 (v) implementation of multilateral intellectual property agreements, such as those concluded or administered under the auspices of WIPO;  
 (b) promote collaborative operations in customs and exchange of best practices;  
 (c) report its findings and the outcomes of its discussions to the Joint Committee; and  
 (d) carry out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint Committee. 
 
4. The IPR Committee shall, in relation to geographical indications :  
 
(a)  enter into consultations and conduct reviews  pursuant to  Articles 
15.32 (System and Standard of Protection for Geographical 
Indications), 15.33 (Protection of Geographical Indications), and 
15.34 (Consultations on Geographical Indications) ;  
 (b)   report the outcomes of those consultations and reviews to the Joint 
Committee ; 
 (c)  monitor the implementation of amendments  to this Agreement, 
pursuant to Section D (Geographical Indications); and  
 (d)  provide a forum for coordination and exchange of views on issues 
related to Section D (Geographical Indications). 
 5.  The IPR Committee shall meet as necessary to carry out its functions pursuant to Articles 15.32 (System and Standard of Protection for 
Geographical Indications) , 15.33 (Protection of Geographical Indications), 
and 15.34 (Consultations on Geographical Indications) ; and otherwise shall 
meet within one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter  as agreed by the Parties.  
  
Article 15.16  
Patent Cooperation and Work Sharing 
 1.  The Parties recogni se the importance of improving the quality and efficiency 
of their respective patent registration systems as well as simplifying and streamlining the procedures and processes of their respective patent offices to the benefit of all users of the patent system and the public as a whole. 
 2.  Further to paragraph 1, the Parties shall endeavour to cooperate between their 
respective patent offices to facilitate the sharing and use of search and examination work of the Parties.  This may include: 
 
(a)  making search and examination results available to the patent office 
of the other Party;
5 and 
 (b)  exchanging information on quality assurance systems and quality standards relating to patent examination. 
 
3.  In order to reduce the complexity and cost of obtaining the grant of a patent, 
the Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to reduce differences in the procedures and processes of their respective patent offices.  
  
Article 15.17  
Public Domain  
 
The Parties recognise the importance of a rich and accessible public 
domain. 
      
                                                            
5 The Parties recognise the importance of multilateral efforts to promote the sharing and use of search 
and examination results  with a view to improving the quality of search and examination processes 
and to reducing the costs for both applicants and patent offices.  
 Article 15.18  
Cooperation in the Area of Traditional Knowledge Associated with Genetic 
Resources  
 
1.  The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate through their respective agencies responsible for intellectual property, or other relevant institutions, to enhance the understanding of issues connected with traditional knowl edge associated 
with genetic resources, and genetic resources.  
 2.  The Parties shall endeavour to pursue quality patent examination, which may include: 
 
(a) that in determining prior art, relevant publicly available documented information related to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources may be taken into account;  
 (b) an opportunity for third parties to cite, in writing, to the competent examining authority prior art disclosures that may have a bearing on patentability, including prior ar t disclosures related to traditional 
knowledge associated with genetic resources; and 
 (c) if applicable and appropriate, the use of databases or digital libraries containing traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.  
  
Article 15.19  
Cooperation on Request  
 
Cooperation activities undertaken under this Chapter are subject to 
the availability of resources, and on request, and on terms and conditions mutually decided upon between the Parties. 
  
Section C  
Trade Marks  
  
Article 15.20  
Types of Signs Registrable as Trade Marks  
 
Neither Party shall require as a condition of registration that a sign be 
visually perceptible.   A Party may require a concise and accurate description, 
or graphical representation, or both, as applicable, of the trade mark.  
 Article 15.21  
Collective and Certification Marks  
 
Each Party shall provide that trade marks include collective marks 
and certification marks.  A Party is not obligated to treat certification marks 
as a separate category in its laws and regulations, provided that those marks are protected.  Each Party shall also provide that signs that may serve as geographical indications are capable of protection under its trade mark system.
6 
  
Article 15.22  
Rights Conferred  
 
Each Party shall provide that the owner of a registered trade mark has 
the exclusive right to prevent all third parties not having the owner’s consent from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods or services which are identical or similar to those in resp ect of which the trade 
mark is registered where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion.  In the case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed.  The rights described above shall not prejudice any existing prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of each Party making rights available on the basis of use. 
  
Article 15.23  
Exceptions  
 
A Party may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a 
trade mark, such as fair use of descriptive terms, provided that those 
exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the owner of the trade mark and of third parties.   
Article 15.24  
Well- Known Trade Marks  
 
Each Party shall provide for the  protection of well -known trade marks  
as referred to in Article 6 bis of the Paris Convention and paragraphs 2 and 3 
of Article 16 of the TRIPS Agreement.  Each Party recognises the importance of the Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well -Known Marks adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the 
Protection of Industrial Property and the General Assembly of  WIPO at the 
Thirty -Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of 
WIPO, 20 to 29 September 1999.
 
 
                                                            
6 Any sign or combination of signs shall be eligible for protection under one or more of the legal 
means for protecting geographical indications, or a combination of those means.  
  
Article 15.25 
Procedural Aspects of Examination, Opposition and Cancellation  
 
Each Party shall provide a system for the examination and registration 
of trade marks which includes among other things:   
 
(a) communicating to the applicant in writing, which may be by 
electronic means,  the reasons for any refusal to register a trade mark; 
 
(b) providing the applicant with an opportunity to respond to communications from the competent authorities, to contest any initial refusal, and to make a judicial appeal of any final refusal to register a trade mark;   
 (c) providi ng an opportunity to oppose the registration of a trade mark 
and an opportunity to seek cancellation
7 of a trade mark through, at a 
minimum, administrative procedures; and   
 (d) requiring administrative decisions in opposition and cancellation proceedings to be reasoned and in writing, which may be provided by 
electronic means.  
 
 
Article 15.26 
Bad Faith Applications  
 
Each Party shall provide that its competent authority has the authority 
to refuse an application or cancel a registration where the application to register the trade mark was, according to its laws and regulations, made in 
bad faith. 
  
Article 15.27 
Electronic Trade Marks Systems  
 
Further to Article 15.9 (Transparency), each Party shall provide: 
 
(a)  a system for the electronic application for, and maintenance of, trade marks; and  
 (b)  a publicly available electronic information system, including an  
online database, of trade mark applications and of registered trade marks.  
  
                                                            
7 For greater certainty, cancellation for the purposes of this Section may be implemented through 
invalidation or revocation proceedings.  
 Article 15.28 
Term of Protection for Trade Marks  
 
Each Party shall provide that initial registration and each renewal of 
registration of a trade mark is for a term of no less than 10 years. 
 
 
Article 15.29 
Efforts toward the Harmonisation of Trade Mark Systems 
 
The Parties recognise the importance of reducing differences in law 
and practice between the Parties’ respective systems for the protection of trade marks.  In addition, each Party shall endeavour to participate in 
international trade mark harmonisation efforts, including the WIPO fora dealing with reform and development of the international trade mark system.  
  
Article 15.30  
Domain Names 
 
1.  In connection with each Party’s system for the management of its country-
code top -level domain (ccTLD) domain names, the Parties recognise the 
benefits of appropriate remedies being available at least in cases in which a 
person registers or holds, with a bad faith intent to profit, a domain name that 
is identical or confusingly similar to a trade mark.  
 
2.  The Parties understand that  those remedies may, but need not, include, among 
other things ; revocation, cancellation, transfer, damages, or injunctive relief. 
 
 
Section D 
Geographical Indications  
  
Article 15.31 
Procedures for the Recognition and Protection of Geographical Indications  
 1. The Parties recognise that geographical indications may be protected through a trade mark or sui generis  system, or other legal means.  
 2. In providing recognition and protection for geographical indications each Party shall:  
 
(a) provide transparent recognition and protection procedures which are readily available and understandable to the public;  
 (b) accept applications or petitions for recognition and protection without 
requiring intercession by a Party on behalf of its nationals;  
 (c) provide an administrative process to verify that a term being proposed for protection meets the relevant requirements as set out in the laws and regulations of that Party;  
 (d) publish the geographical indication proposed for recognition and protection;  
 (e) provide procedures to object to recognition and protection and for recognition and protection to be refused or otherwise not afforded.  
The grounds of objection shall include the following: 
 
(i) the proposed geographical indication conflicts with the name 
of a plant variety or an animal breed and as a result is likely to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the good; or  
 (ii) the proposed geographical indication is the term customary in 
common language as the common name for the good concerned in the territory of that Party; and  
 
(f) provide procedures for the cancellation
8 or invalidation of recognition 
and protection. 
  
Article 15.32 
System and Standard of Protection for Geographical Indications  
 1.  If Australia enters into an international agreement with a non-party that: 
  
(a) enters into force after the date this Agreement is signed by both Parties;  and 
 (b) includes obligations
9 concerning a system or standard of protection 
for geographical indica tions for spirits, agricultural products or 
foodstuffs that is different to that in effect in Australia upon entry into force of this Agreement, that system or standard being “a new standard of protection”,
10   
  
                                                            
8 For greater certainty, cancellation for the purposes of this Section may be implemented throug h 
nullification or revocation proceedings . 
9 For greater certainty, “obligations ” in the relevant international agreement shall be read to include 
any limitations or exceptions that may apply to those obligations under that international agreement 
and does  not refer to obligations in respect of individual geographical indications of the non-party . 
10 For the purposes of this Section, “protection” shall include, matters affecting the availability, 
acquisition, scope, maintenance , and enforcement of geographical indications as well as those matters 
affecting the use of geographical indications specifically addressed in this Agreement.  
 the Parties shall enter into consultations as soon as reasonably practicable 
after the date of entry into force of the non- party  agreement and no later than 
four months after the date of that event, to review this Section with a view to amending this Agreement so that no less favourable treatment is applied under this Section in relation to the protection of geographical indications.  That review shall be undertaken through the IPR Committee  pursuant to 
Article 15.15 ( Committee on Intellectual Property Rights ).  
  2. If this Agreement had not yet e ntered into force by the date the Parties would 
otherwise have been required to enter into consultations pursuant to paragraph 1, the Parties shall enter into consultations as soon as reasonably practicable after the date of entry into force of  this Agreem ent, and no later 
than four months after the date of that event, to review this Section with a view to amending this Agreement so that no less favourable treatment is applied under this Section in relation to the protection of geographical indications. That review shall be undertaken through the IPR Committee 
pursuant to Article 15.15 Committee on Intellectual Property Rights ). 
  
Article 15.33 
Protection of Geographical Indications  
 
If Australia enters into an international agreement with a non -party  
that enters into force after the date this Agreement is signed by both Parties , 
and that protects specific geographical indications  for spirits,  agricultural 
products  or foodstuffs  to a new standard of protection then:   
 
(a) the United Kingdom may provide  to Australia a list of specific 
geographical indications for spirits, agricultural products and foodstuffs that it seeks to be protected in Australia;  
 (b) Australia shall examine and publish for opposition those geographical indications under its domest ic requirements as soon as reasonably 
practicable following receipt of the United Kingdom’s list;  
 (c) in accordance with this Section, and subject to those geographical indications satisfying Australia’s domestic requirements for the protection of a geographical indication to the new standard of protection, Australia shall protect those geographical indications to the new standard of protection; and 
 (d) the Parties shall then enter into consultations as soon as reasonably practicable following Australia’s examination and objections process relating to the list of United Kingdom geographical indications under its domestic requirements and no later than four months after the date of that event, to consider amendments to this Agreement, with a view to including a list in an Annex to this Agreement to indicate the United Kingdom geographical indications which are protected in  
 Australia. That review shall be un dertaken through the IPR 
Committee pursuant to Article 15.1 5 (Committee on Intellectual 
Property Rights).  
 
 
 
Article 15.34 
Consultations on Geographical Indications  
 
If, no later than two years following the  date of entry into force of this 
Agreement , an agreement meeting  the criteria described in Article  15.32 
(System and Standard of Protection for Geographical Indications ) has not 
entered into force, the Parties shall review this Section  with a view to 
considering further provisions governing the protection or recognition of geographical indications.  Such a review shall consider the Parties’ interests and sensitivities concerning the protection of geographical indications for  
spirits,  agricultural products , and foodstuffs.  That  review may be unde rtaken 
through the IPR Committee  pursuant to Article 15.15 ( Committee on 
Intellectual Property Rights ).  
  
Article 15.35 
Amendments Relating to Geographical Indications  
 
Amendments relating to geographical indications shall enter into 
force in accordance with Article 32.2  (Amendments – Final Provisions).   
  
Section E 
Patents and Data  
  
Article 15.36 
Rights Conferred  
 1. A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights:  
(a) where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to prevent third 
parties not having the owner’s consent from the acts of making, using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes that product;   
 
(b)  where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent third 
parties not having the owner’s consent from the act of using the process, and from the acts of using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes at least the product obtained directly by that process.  
 2. Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by succession, 
the patent and to conclude licensing contracts. 
  
Article 15.37 
Patentable Subject Matter  
 1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, each Party shall make patents available for any invention, whether a product or process, in all fields of technology, provided that the invention is new, involves an inventive step and is capable of industrial application.
11 
 2.  A Party may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within its 
territory of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public  or morality, including to protect human, animal or plant life or health 
or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment, provided that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by its law. 
 3.  A Party may also exclude from patentability:  
 
(a) diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or animals;  
 (b) plants and animals other than micro- organisms, and essentially 
biological processes for the production of plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological processes. 
  
Article 15.38 
Exceptions  
 
A Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights 
conferred by a patent, provided that those exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of  the 
legitimate interests of third parties.  
 
 
Article 15.39 
Experimental Use 
 
Without limiting Article 15.38 (Exceptions), each Party shall provide 
that any person may do an act that would otherwise infringe a patent if the act is done for experimental purposes relating to the subject matter of a patented invention. 
 
                                                            
11 For the purposes of this Article, a Party may deem the terms “inventive step” and “capable of 
industrial application” to be synonymous with the terms “non -obvious” and “useful” respectively.  
 Article 15.40  
Regulatory Review Exception  
 
Without prejudice to the scope of, and consistent with, Article 15.38 
(Exceptions), each Party: 
 
(a) shall provide that a third person may do an act that would otherwise 
infringe a patent with respect to a pharmaceutical product invention if the act is done for purposes connected with obtaining regulatory approval
12 in that Party or another country or both; and 
 (b) may provide that a third person may do an act that would otherwise infringe a patent with respect to all other types of invention if the act is done for purposes connected with obtaining regulatory approval in that Party or another country or both. 
  
Article 15.41 
Other Use Without Authorisation of the Right Holder  
 
The Parties understand that nothing in this Chapter shall limit a 
Party’s rights and obligations under the TRIPS Agreement to authorise use of a patent.  
  
Article 15.42 
Patent Filing  
 
Each Party shall provide that if an invention is made independently 
by more than one inventor, and separate applications claiming that invention are filed with, or for, the relevant authority of the Party, that Party shall grant the patent on the application that is patentable and that has t he earliest filing 
date or, if applicable, priority date, unless that application has, prior to 
publication,
13 been withdrawn, abandoned or refused. 
  
Article 15.43 
Amendments, Corrections and Observations  
 
1. Each Party shall provide a patent applicant with at least one opportunity to make amendments, corrections and observations in connection with its application. 
 
                                                            
12 For the purpose of Article 15.40( a), a party may treat “regulatory approval” to mean “marketing 
approval”.  
13 For greater certainty, a Party may grant the paten t to the subsequent application that is patentable, 
if an earlier application has been withdrawn, abandoned, or refused, or is not prior art against the 
subsequent application.  
 2. Each Party shall not revoke or invalidate a patent, either totally or in part, 
without the patent owner being given the opportunity to make observations on the intended revocation or invalidation, and to make amendments and corrections  where  permitted under a Party’s law within a reasonable time 
limit.   
 3. A Party may provide that amendments made pursuant to  paragraph 1 or 2 do 
not go beyond the scope of the disclosure of the invention, as of the filing date.   
  
Article 15.44 
Publication of Patent Applications  
 1. Recognising the benefits of transparency in the patent system, each Party shall publish unpublished pending patent applications promptly after the expiration of 18 months from the filing date or, if priority is claimed, from the earliest priority date.  
 2. If a pending application is not published promptly in accordance with paragraph 1, a Party shall publish that application or the corresponding patent, as soon as practicable.  
 3. Each Party shall provide that an applicant may request the early publicatio n 
of an application prior to the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 1. 
  
Article 15.45 
Information Relating to Published Patent Applications and Granted Patents  
 
For published patent applications and granted patents, and in 
accordance with the Party’s requirements for prosecution of such applications and patents, each Party shall make available to the public at least the following information, to the extent that such information is in the possession of the competent authorities and is generated on, or after, the date of the entry into force of this Agreement:  
 
(a) search and examination results, including details of, or information related to, relevant prior art searches;  
 (b) as appropriate, non -confidential communications from applicants; 
and  
 (c) patent and non- patent related literature citations submitted by 
applicants and relevant third parties.  
 Article 15.46 
Conditions on Patent Applicants  
 
Each Party shall require an applicant for a patent to disclose the 
invention in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to be 
carried out by a person skilled in the art.  
  
Article 15.47 
Extension of the Duration of Rights Conferred by a Patent 
 1. The Parties recognise that pharmaceutical products protected by a patent in their respective territor ies may be subject to an administrative authorisation 
procedure before being put on their respective markets.  With respect to a 
pharmaceutical product
14 that is subject to a patent, each Party shall make 
available either:  
 
(a) an adjustment of the patent term; or 
 (b) a period of additional sui generis protection conferring the rights 
conferred by the patent, 
 to compensate the patent owner for reduction
15 of the effective patent term 
as a result of the marketing approval process.  
 2. For greater certainty, in implementing the obligations of this Article, each 
Party may provide for conditions, limitations, waivers and exceptions provided that the Party continues to give effect to this Article. 
  
Section F 
Undisclosed Test or Other Data  
  
Article 15.48 
Protection  of Undisclosed Test or Other Data for Agricultural Chemical 
Products  
 
If a Party requires, as a condition for granting marketing approval for 
an agricultural chemical product that  utilises a new active substance, the 
submission of undisclosed test or othe r data, that Party shall not permit third 
persons, without the consent of the person that previously submitted that information, to place on the market the same or a similar product on the basis of:    
 
                                                            
14 For the purpose of this Article, a Party  may treat “pharmaceutical product” as “pharmaceutical 
substance”,  as provided in its relevant law . 
15 For the purposes of this A rticle , a Party may treat “reduction ” as “unreasonable curtailment ”.  
 (a) that information ; or 
 
(b) the marketing approval granted to the person that submitted that information , 
 for at least 10 years from the date of marketing approval of the previously 
approved agricultural chemical product; such date to be determined in accordance with each Party’s law.
16 17 
 
 
Article 15.49 
Protection of Undisclosed Test or Other Data for Pharmaceutical Products 
 
1. If a Party requires, as a condition for granting marketing approval for a new 
pharmaceutical product, the submission of undisclosed test or other data concerning the safety or eff icacy or quality of the product, that Party shall 
not permit third persons, without the consent of the person that previously submitted that information, to place on the market the same or a similar
18 
product on the basis of: 
 
(
a) tha
t information ; or  
 (b) the marketing approval granted to the person that submitted that information,   
 for at least five years from the date of marketing approval of the previously approved pharmaceutical product, such date to be determined in accordance 
with each Party’s law.  
 
2. For the purposes of this Article, a new pharmaceutical product is one that 
does not consist of or contain an active substance that has previously been approved for marketing in the Party.
19 
  
                                                            
16 Nothing in this Article limits a Party from establishing conditions, limitations or exception s when 
implementing the obligations set forth in this Article, provided that those conditions, limitations or exceptions are consistent with this Chapter.  
17 Each Party may determine what constitutes an “agricultural chemical product ” in accordance with 
its law.  
18 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Section, a pharmaceutical product is “similar” to a 
previously approved pharmaceutical product if the marketing approval, or, in the alternative, the applicant’s request for that approval, of  that similar pharmaceutical product is based upon the 
undisclosed test or other data concerning the safety or efficacy or quality of the previously approved 
pharmaceutical product, or the prior approval of that previously approved product .  
19 Nothing in t his Article limits a Party from establishing conditions, limitations or exceptions when 
implementing the obligations set forth in this Article, provided that those conditions, limitations or 
exceptions are consistent with  this Chapter.  
 Section G 
Registered Industrial Designs 
 
 
Article 15.50  
Protection of Registered Industrial Designs 
 
1. Each Party shall provide for the protection of independently created registered industrial designs that are new or original.  This protection shall confer an exclusive right upon their holders in accordance with  this Article.  
 2. A Party may provide limited exceptions to the protection of registered industrial designs in a manner consistent with Article 25 and paragraph 2 of Article 26 of the TRIPS Agreement.  
 3. Each Party shall ensure that an owner of a protected registered industrial design has at least the right to prevent third parties not having the owner ’s 
consent from making, offering for sale, selling, importing, or using articles 
bearing or embodying a design which is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected registered industrial design when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.  
  
Article 15.51 
Duration of Protection 
 
Each Party shall ensure that the total term of protection available for 
registered designs is no less than 10 years.  
  
Article 15.52  
Multiple Design Applications  
 
Each Party shall provide a system for the registration of industrial 
designs which allows for two or more designs to be registered through the filing of one application. 
 
 
Article 15.53  
Improving Industrial Design Systems  
 
The Parties recognise the importance of improving the quality and 
efficiency of their respective industrial design registration systems.  
 Article 15.54  
International Classification System for Industrial Designs  
 
Each Party shall endeavour to use a classification system for 
industrial designs that is consistent with the Locarno Agreement. 
 
 
Article 15.55  
International Registration of Industrial Designs  
 
Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to accede to the Hague 
Agreement , if it is not already party to it.  
  
Section H  
Copyright and Related Rights  
  
Article 15.56  
Authors  
 
1. Each Party shall provide authors with the exclusive right to authorise or 
prohibit:    (a)  the  reproduction in any manner or form , in whole or in part , of 
their works;    
 (b)  the distribution to the public , by sale or otherwise, of the original and 
copies
20 of their works;  
 (c)  the communication to the public of their works, by wire or wireless means, including the making available to the public of their works in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them; and  
 (d)  the commercial rental
21 to the public of their works. 
 
2.  For the purposes of this Article, “communication to the public” shall be construed in accordance with Article 8 of the WCT.   
      
                                                            
20 For the purposes o f this Article, the expressions “copies” and “original and copies” refer exclusively 
to fixed copies that can be put into circulation as tangible objects.  
21 A Party may satisfy this obligation by complying with Article 7 of the WCT.  
 Article 15.57  
Performers  
 
1.  Each Party shall provide performers  with the exclusive right to authorise or 
prohibit: 
 
(a)  the fixation of their unfixed performances;   
 (b)  the reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or in part, of fixations of their performances;   
 (c)  the distribution to the public, by sale or otherwise, of the original and copies of their performances fixed in phonograms;  
 (d)  the making available to the public of their performances fixed in phonograms, by wire or wireless means, in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them;   
 (e)  the broadcasting and the communication to the public of their unfixed 
performances except where the performance is itself already a broadcast performance; and  
 (f)  the commercial rental to the public of the originals and copies of their performances fixed in phonograms even after distribution of them by, or pursuant to authorisation by, the performer. 
 2.  For the purposes of this Article, “communication to the public” means the 
transmission to the public by any medium, other than by broadcasting.
22 
  
Article 15.58  
Producers of Phonograms  
 
Each Party shall provide producers of phonograms  with the exclusive 
right to authorise or prohibit:  
 
(a) the reproduction in any manner or form, in whole or in part , of their  
phonograms; 
 (b) the distribution to the public, by sale  or otherwise, of the original or 
copies of their phonograms; 
 
                                                            
22 For the purpose of this Article, “communication to the public” does not include the making 
available to the public of fixations of performances, by wire or wireless means, in such a way that 
members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen  by them.  
 (c) the making available to the public of their phonograms, by wire or 
wireless means, in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them; and  
 (d) the commercial rental to the public of the origina l and copies of their 
phonograms, even after distribution of them by, or pursuant to authorisation by the producer of the phonogram. 
  
Article 15.59 
Broadcasting Organisations  
 
Each Party shall provide broadcasting organisations with the 
exclusive right to authorise or prohibit:  
 
(a) the fixation of their broadcasts;   
 (b) the reproduction in any manner or form, in whole or in part, of fixations of their broadcasts;  and 
 (c) the rebroadcasting of their broadcasts.  
  
Article 15.60  
Broadcasting and C ommunication to the P ublic of Phonograms P ublished for 
Commercial P urposes  
 
The Parties agree to discuss measures to ensure adequate 
remuneration for performers and producers of phonograms when phonograms published for commercial purposes are used for broadcasting or for any communication to the public. 
  
Article 15.61 
Artist’s Resale Right  
 1. Each Party shall provide, for the benefit of the author of an original work of art, a resale right, to be defined as an inalienable right, which cannot be waived, even in advance, to receive a royalty based on the sale price obtained 
for any resale of the work, subsequent to the first transfer of the work by the author. 
 2.  Each Party may determine the procedure for collection of the royalty, its amount and the criteria for the works, resales and authors eligible to receive the royalty under its law.  
 3. The Parties shall enter into consultations  to conclude, as soon as reasonably 
practicable after entry into force of this Agreement, reciprocal arrangements  
 for a uthors of a Party to receive royalties from eligible resales of works 
referred to in paragraph 1 in the territory of the other Party.  The Parties shall 
endeavour to facilitate the participation of relevant stakeholders in such 
consultations, including col lective management organisations responsible for 
the collection and distribution of the resale royalty, and other relevant art sector stakeholders.
23 
  
Article 15.62  
Limitations and Exceptions  
 1. With respect to works, performances, and phonograms, each Party shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to certain special cases that do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work, performance or phonogram, and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder. 
 2. This Article is without prejudice to the limitations and exceptions to any rights permitted by the TRIPS Agreement, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention, the WCT, or the WPPT.  
  
Article 15.63  
Balance in Copyright and Related Rights Systems  
 
Each Party shall endeavour to achieve an appropriate balance in its 
copyright and related rights system, among other things by means of  
limitations or exceptions that are consistent with Article 15.62  (Limitations 
and Exceptions), including those for the digital environment, giving due consideration to legitimate purposes such as, but not limited to: criticism, comment , news reporting, teaching, scholarship, research, and other similar 
purposes, and fac ilitating  access to published works for people with 
disability.
24 
  
Article 15.64  
Term of Protection  
 
1. Each Party shall provide that the rights of an author of a work within the meaning of Article 2 of the Berne Convention shall run for the life of the author and for 70 years after the author’s death. 
 
                                                            
23 The Parties recognise that arrangements between relevant collective management organisations in 
Australia and the United Kingdom may be necessary to facilitate reciprocal arrangements for authors 
of a Party to receive royalties from eligible r esales of works referred to in paragraph 1 in the territory 
of the other Party.  
24 For greater certainty, a use that has commercial aspects may in appropriate circumstances be 
considered to have a legitimate purpose under Article 15.62 (Limitations and Exce ptions).  
 2. In the case of a work of joint authorship, each Party shall provide that the 
term referred to in paragraph 1 shall be calculated from the death of the last surviving author.  
 3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, where the term of protection of a work is not determined by reference to the life of a natural person, each Party shall provide that the term of protection shall run for 70 years from the creation of the work or, if lawfully made available to the public within 50 years from creation, 70 years from the first such making available.
25 
 4.  Each Party shall provide that the rights of broadcasting organisations shall run for 50 years from the first transmission of a broadcast.  
 5. Each Party shall provide that the rights of performers for their performances in phonograms shall run for 50 years from fixation in phonogram of the performance or, if lawfully made available to the public during this time, 70 years from the first such making available.
26 
 6.  Each Party shall provide that the rights of producers of phonograms shall run for 50 years from the fixation in phonogram being made or, if lawfully made available to the public during this time, 70 years from the first such making available.  Each Party may adopt effective measures to ensure that the profit generated during the 20 years of protection beyond 50 years is shared fairly between the performers and the producers of phonograms. 
 7.  Each Party shall provide that the terms laid down in this Article shall be calculated from 1  January of the year following the event. 
 8.  Each Party may provide for longer terms of protection than those provided for in this Article.  
 9.  For greater certainty, a Party shall not be required to  restore protection to 
subject matter that on the date  of entry into force of this Agreement has fallen 
into the public domain in its territory.  A Party shall not be required to extend 
the term of protection for subject matter that already exists on the date  of 
entry into force of this Agreement. 
  
Article 15.65  
Collective Management Organisations  
 1. The Parties shall endeavour to promote cooperation between the collective management organisations established in their respective territories for the purpose of facilitating licensing of content between the Parties, as well as 
                                                            
25 For the purposes of this Article, “making available to the public” shall be determined based on a 
Party’s law.  
26 The obligations in paragraphs 5 and 6 do not apply to phonograms which came into existence before 
1 January 1994.  
 encouraging the transfer of rights revenue between the respective collective 
management organisations for the use of such content. 
 
2. The Parties shall endeavour to promote the t ransparency of collective 
management organisations established in their respective territories, particularly in relation to the collection of rights revenues, the deductions they make from the rights revenue collected, their distribution policies, and the repertoire they represent.  
 3. E ach Party shall endeavour to promote the non -discriminatory treatment by 
collective management organisations of rights holders these organisations represent either directly or via another collective management organisation.   
 4.  Each Party shall encourage collective management organisations established in its territory to regularly, diligently and accurately distribute amounts due to represented collective management organisations in a timely manner.  
  
Article 15.66  
Technological Protection Measures 
 
1. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the unauthorised circumvention of effective technological measures, where carried out knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know .  
 2. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the manufacture, import, distribution, sale, rental, offer or advertisement for sale or rental, of devices, products or components or the provision of services which: 
 
(a) are promoted, advertised or marketed for the purpose of circumvention of any effective technological measures;  
 (b) have only a limited commercially significant purpose or use other than to circumvent any effective technological measures; or 
 (c) are primarily designed, produced, or performed for the purpose of enabling or facilitating the circumvention of any effective technological measures.  
 
3. The obligations in this Article do not apply in respect of effective technological measures applied to computer programs. 
 4. Each Party may provide for exceptions and limitations to measures implementing paragraphs 1 and 2 in accordance with its law and the relevant international agreements referred to in Article 15.7 (International Agreements) provided that they do not significantly impair the adequacy of  
 legal protection of those measures and the effectiveness of legal remedies 
against the acts prescribed in paragraphs 1 and 2. 
 5. For the purposes of this Article, “effective technological measures” means any technology, device, or component which, in the normal course of its operation, is used by authors, performers, or producers of phonograms in 
connection with the exercise of their rights under this Section  and which 
restricts acts, in respec t of their works, performances, or phonograms, that 
are not authorised by the authors, performers, or producers of phonograms. 
  
Article 15.67  
Rights Management Information  
 1. Each Party shall provide adequate and effective legal remedies against any person knowingly performing, without authority, any of the following acts knowing, or having reasonable grounds to know, that it will induce, enable, facilitate, or conceal an infringement of protected works, performances or phonograms:  
 
(a) to remove or alter any electronic rights management information; or  
 (b) to distribute, import for distribution, broadcast, communicate, or make available to the public copies of protected works, performances or phonograms knowing that electronic rights management information has been removed or altered without authority.  
 
2. A Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations or exceptions to measures implementing paragraph 1.  The obligations set forth in this Article 
are without prejudice to the limitations and e xceptions to infringement of 
copyright and related rights under a Party’s law.  
  
Article 15.68  
Application of Article 18 of the Berne Convention and Article 14.6 of the 
TRIPS Agreement  
 
Each Party shall apply Article 18 of the Berne Convention and Article 
14.6 of the TRIPS Agreement, mutatis mutandis , to works, performances and 
phonograms, and the rights in and protections afforded to that subject matter as required by this Section.  
 Section I  
Trade Secrets  
 
 
Article 15.69  
Trade Secrets  
 
1. In the course of ensuring effective protection against unfair competition as provided in Article 10bis  of the Paris Convention, each Party shall ensure that 
trade secret holders have the legal means to prevent trade secrets lawfully in 
their control from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without their consent in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices.  
 
2. Subject to paragraphs 3 and 4, each Party shall provide that  at least  each of  
the following shall be considered contrary to honest commercial practices:   
 
(a) the acquisition of a trade secret without the consent of the trade secret holder, whenever carried out by unauthorised access to, appropriation 
of, or copying of any documents, objects, materials, substances or electronic files, lawfully under the control of the trade secret holder, containing the trade secret or from  which the trade secret can be 
deduced;  
(b) the use or disclosure of a trade secret  whenever carried o ut, without 
the consent of the trade secret holder,  by a person who is found 
to meet  any of the following conditions: 
 
(i) having acquired the trade secret in a manner  referred to in 
subparagraph (a); 
 
(ii) being in breach of a  confidentiality agreement or  any other 
duty not to disclose the trade secret; or  
 (iii) being in breach of a contractual or any other duty to limit the use of the trade secret;   
 
(c) the acquisition, use or disclosure of a trade secret  whenever carried 
out by a person who, at the time of the acquisition, use or disclosure, 
knew or ought, under the circumstances, to have known
27 that the 
trade secret had been obtained directly or indirectly from another person who was disclosing the trade secret  in a manner referred to in 
subparagraph (b).  
3. Neither Party shall provide that the acquisition, use and disclosure of a trade 
secret is considered contrary to honest commercial practices:  
 
                                                            
27  For the purpose of this Article, a Party may interpret “ought to have known ” as “was grossly 
negligent in failing to know ”.  
 (a) if the trade secret is obtained through: 
 
(i) independent discovery or creation;  
 
(ii) reverse engineering of a product by a person who is lawfully 
in possession of it and who is free from any legally valid duty to limit the acquisition of the relevant information; or  
 (iii) the exercise of the right of workers or workers ’ representatives 
to informa tion and consultation in accordance with the Party’s 
law; or  
 
(b) if the acquisition,  use or disclosure is required or permitted by the 
Party’s law.  
 
4. Each Party may provide for limited exceptions and limitations to the rights of trade secret holders in circumstances where the legitimate interests of third 
parties, the general public or the Party outweigh the  legitimate interests of 
trade secret holders,  such as in the following cases:   
 (a) for exercising the right to freedom of expression and information, including respect for the freedom and pluralism of the media; and  
 
(b) for revealing misconduct, wrongdoing or illegal activity, provided 
that the person acquiring, using, and disclosing the trade secret did so 
for the purpose of protecting the general public interest.   
 
 
Section J  
Enforcement  
 
 
Sub-Section J.1 
General Obligations  
  
Article 15.70  
General Obligations  
 
1. Each Party shall provide for the  procedures set out in this Section in respect 
of the enforcement of intellectual property rights.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that the procedures provided for in this Section shall:  
 
(a) be fair and equitable;
 
 (b) not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-limits or unwarranted delays;  
  
(c) permit effective action against any act of infringement, including 
expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and remedies that constitute a deterrent to future infringements; 
 (d) be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade, including electronic commerce, and to provide for safeguards against their abuse;  
 (e) be implemented in a manner consistent with the Party’s law concerning freedom of expression, fair process, and privacy; and 
 (f) be implemented in a manner that takes into account  the need for 
proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement of the intellectual property right and the applicable remedies and penalties, as well as the interest of third parties.  
 
3. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring that righ t holders
28 have 
access to justice and each Party shall ensure that it has in place a judicial system and alternative dispute resolution mechanisms to allow right holders to enforce their intellectual property rights.  
 4. This Section does not create any obligation: 
 
(a) to put in place a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights distinct from that for the enforcement of laws and regulations in general, nor does it affect the capacity of each Party to enforce its laws and regulati ons in general; or 
 (b) with respect to the distribution of resources as between the 
enforcement of intellectual property rights and the enforcement of laws and regulations in general.  
  
Sub-Section J.2 
Enforcement – Civil Remedies  
  
Article 15.71 
Availability of Civil Enforcement  
 
Each Party shall make available to a right holder civil judicial 
procedures concerning the enforcement of any intellectual property right covered under this Chapter. 
 
                                                            
28 For greater certainty, references in this Section to a right holder shall include a trade secret holder; 
and do not limit the persons a Party may permit to enforce intellectual property rights, in accordance 
with its law.  
  
Article 15.72 
Measures for Preserving Evidence 
 
1.  Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority, on 
application by a person who has presented reasonably available evidence sufficient to support their claim that their intellectual property right has been infringed or is about to be infringed, to order prompt and effective provisional 
measures to preserve relevant evidence in relation to the alleged infringement, subject to appropriate safeguards and the protection of confidential information.  
 2.  Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to adopt provisional measures, where appropriate, in particular if any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right holder or if there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed, in the absence of a party. 
 3.  Those provisional measures may include the detailed description or the physical seizure of:  
 
(a) suspected infringing goods;  
 (b) materials and implements predominantly used in the production or distribution of these goods; or 
 (c) documentary evidence relevant to the infringement.  
  
Article 15.73 
Provisional and Precautionary Measures 
 
1.  Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to, on request of the applicant:  
 
(a) issue against the alleged infringer or,  where appropriate and subject 
to the Party’s law, a third party over whom the relevant judicial authority exercises jurisdiction and whose services are used to infringe an intellectual property right, an interlocutory injunction intended to prevent any imminent infringement of an intellectual property right, or forbid, on a provisional basis , the continuation of 
the alleged infringement of that right; and  
 (b) order, where appropriate, the seizure or delivery up of goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right, so as to prevent their entry into or movement within the channels of commerce. 
 
2. In the case of an alleged infringement , each Party shall provide that if the 
applicant demonstrates circumstances likely to endanger the recover y of  
 damages, its judicial authorities shall have the authority to order , subject to 
the Party’s law, the precautionary seizure of the movable and immovable 
property of the alleged infringer, including the blocking of the alleged infringer’ s bank accounts and other assets.  
  
Article 15.74 
Right to Information  
 1. Each Party shall provide that, during civil proceedings concerning an infringement of an intellectual property right and in response to a justified request of the applicant , the judicial authorities have the authority to order 
that information on the origin and distribution networks of the goods or services which infringe an intellectual property right be provided by: 
 
(a) the infringer or an alleged infringer; and 
 (b) any other person involved in the distribution and production of 
infringing goods or services on a commercial scale.  
 
2. This Article applies without prejudice to other provisions in a Party’s law 
governing privilege, the protection of confidentiality of information sources, or the processing of personal data. 
  
Article 15.75 
Injunctions  
 1. Each Party shall provide that where its judicial authorities have found an infringement of an intellectual property right, its judicial authorities have the authority to issue an injunction aimed at prohibiting or stopping the 
infringement.
29 
 2. The injunction referred to in paragraph 1 shall be available against:  
(a) the infringer; and  
 (b) where appropriate and subject to the Party’s law, a third party over whom the relevant judicial authority exercises jurisdiction and whose services are used to infringe the intellectual property right.  
      
                                                            
29 The obligations in this  section are without prejudice to the flexibilities available under Article 
44.2 of the TRIPS Agreement.  
 Article 15.76 
Corrective Measures  
 
1.  Each Party shall provide that, on request of the applicant and without prejudice to any damages due to the right holder by reason of the infringement, its judicial authorities have the authority to order that goods 
found to be infringing an intellectual pr operty right are definitively  removed 
from the channels of commerce, or destroyed.  In regard to  counterfeit trade 
mark  goods, the simple removal of the  trade mark  unlawfully affixed is not 
sufficient, other than in exceptional circumstances, to permit the  release of 
goods into the channels of commerce.  Each Party shall also provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to also order, as appropriate, the destruction of materials and implements predominantly used in the creation or manufacture of those goods.  
 2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order that the measures referred to in paragraph 1 are to be carried out at the 
expense of the infringer. 
  
Article 15.77 
Damages 
 
1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order an infringer who, knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged in an infringing activity, to pay the right holder damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered as a result of the 
infringement. 
 2. Each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial proceedings, its judicial authorities have the authority to order the infringer, at least in cases described in paragraph 1, to pay the right holder the infringer’s prof its that are 
attributable to the infringement.  
  
Article 15.78 
Costs  
 
Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority 
to order, in accordance with its law, that court costs or fees and appropriate 
attorney fees and other expenses incurred by the successful party in legal 
proceedings concerning the infringement of  intellectual property rights  shall 
be borne by the unsuccessful party.
30  
  
                                                            
30 For greater certainty, nothing in this Article precludes a Party from providing that its judicial 
authorities have the authority to disallow costs that are unreasonably or unnecessarily incurred or that 
are disproportionate in amount.  
 Article 15.79  
Safeguards  
 
1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to require the applicant for a measure provided for in Article 15.72 (Measures 
for Preserving Evidence) or Article 15.73 (Provisional and Precautionary 
Measures) in respect of an intellectual property right to provide any reasonably available evidence in order to satisfy the judicial authority, with a sufficient degree of certainty, that the applicant’s right is being infringed or that the infringement is imminent, and to order the applicant to provide security or equivalent assurance set at a level sufficient to protect the person against whom a measure is sought and to prevent abuse.  Such security or 
equivalent assurance shall  not unreasonably  deter recourse to those 
procedures. 
 2. Each Party shall ensure that its judicial authorities have the authority to order a party at whose request measures were taken and that has abused enforcement procedures with regard to intellectual property rights to provide to a person subject to that measure adequate compensation for the injury suffered because of that abuse.  The judicial authorities shall also have the 
authority to order the applicant to pay the defendant expenses, which may include appropriate attorney’s fees. 
 3. Each Party shall provide that in relation to a civil judicial proceeding concerning the enforcement of an intellectual property right, its judicial or other authorities have the authority to impose sanctions on a party, counsel, experts or other persons subject to the court’s jurisdiction for violation of judicial orders concerning the protection of confidential information produced or exchanged in that proceeding. 
  
Article 15.80  
Administrative Procedures 
 
To the extent that any civil remedy can be ordered as a result  of 
administrative procedures on the merits of a case, each Party shall provide that those procedures conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set out in this Sub- Section.  
 Sub-Section J.3 
Enforcement – Border Measures  
 
 
Article 15.81  
Border Measures  
 1. Each Party:  
 
(a) shall provide for applications to initiate procedures to suspend the release of, or to detain, suspected goods; and 
 (b) may provide for applications in respect of other goods that are suspected of infringing intellectual property rights. 
 
2. For the purposes of this Article:  
 
(a) “competent authorities” may include the appropriate judicial, administrative or law enforcement authorities under a Party’s law;  
 (b) “ suspected goods ” means goods under customs control that are 
suspected of infringing a trade mark or copyright, including counterfeit trade mark goods and pirated copyright goods; 
 (c) “counterfei t trade mark  goods” means any goods, including 
packaging, bearing without authorisation a  trade mark  that is identical 
to the  trade mark  validly registered in respect of such goods, or that 
cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trade 
mark, and that thereby infringes the rights of the owner of the  trade 
mark  in question under the law of the Party providing the procedures 
under this Section; and  
 (d) “ pirated copyright goods ” means any goods that are copies made 
without the consent of the right holder or person duly authorised by the right holder in the country of production and that are made directly 
or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy would have constituted an infringement of a copyright or a related right under the law of the Party providing the procedures un der this 
Section. 
 
3. With respect to the initiation of the procedures provided for in paragraph 1 by a right holder, each Party shall provide that the relevant right holder is required: 
 
(a) to provide adequate evidence to satisfy the competent authoritie s that, 
pursuant to its law, there is prima facie  an infringement of the right 
holder’s intellectual property right; and  
 (b) to supply sufficient information that may reasonably be expected to 
be within the right holder’s knowledge to make the suspected goods reasonably recognisable by its competent authorities.  
 4. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to require a right holder initiating procedures to suspend the release of suspected counterfeit or confusingly similar  trade mark  or pirated copyright goods, to 
provide a reasonable security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent authorities and to prevent abuse.  Each Party 
shall provide that such security or equivalent assurance does not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.  A Party may provide that 
the security may be in the form of a bond conditioned to hold the defendant harmless from any loss or damage resulting from any suspension of the release of goods in the even t the competent authorities determine that the 
article is not an infringing good. 
 5. A Party may provide that its competent authorities have the authority to inform the right holder of the names and addresses of the consignor, exporter, consignee or importer; a description of the goods; the quantity of the goods; and, if known, the country of origin of the goods.  This paragraph is without 
prejudice to a Party’s law pertaining to privacy or confidential information, and applies if a Party’s competent autho rities have detained or suspended the 
release of suspected goods.  
 6. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to initiate border measures ex officio  for imported goods and goods destined for 
export, without the need for a formal complaint from a third party or right holder, with respect to suspected goods.  Each Party shall provide that its 
customs authorities use risk analysis to identify suspected g oods, which may 
include random selection.  
 7. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities decide about granting or recording applications to suspend the release of suspected goods, within a reasonable period of time after the initiation of procedures described in paragraph 1. 
 8. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a procedure by which its competent authorities may determine within a reasonable period of time after the initiation of the procedures described in paragraphs 1 and 4, whether the 
suspe cted goods infringe an intellectual property right.
31  If a Party provides 
administrative procedures for the determination of an infringement, it may also provide its authorities with the authority to impose administrative penalties or sanctions, which may include fines or the seizure of the infringing goods following a determination that the goods are infringing.
  
 
                                                            
31 A Party may comply with the obligation in this Article with respect to a determination that suspect 
goods under paragraph 5 infringe an intellectual property right through a determination that the 
suspect goods bear a false trade description.  
 9. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to 
order the destruction or disposal of goods following a determination that the goods are infringing.  In cases in which the goods are not destroyed, each 
Party shall provide that,  except in exceptional circumstances, the goods are 
disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any harm to the right holder.  In regard to counterfeit trade mark goods, the 
simple removal of the trade mark unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than in exceptional cases, to permit the release of the goods into the channels of commerce.  
 10. Each Party may provide that, where requested by the customs authorities, the holder of the granted or recorded application shal l be obliged to reimburse 
the costs incurred by the customs authorities, or other parties acting on behalf of customs authorities, from the moment of detention or suspension of the 
release of the goods, including storage, handling, and any costs relating to the destruction or disposal of the goods. 
 
11. If a Party establishes or assesses, in connection with the procedures described 
in this Article, an application fee, storage fee or destruction fee, that fee shall 
not be set at an amount that unreasonably deters recourse to these procedures.  
 12. Each Party may exclude from the application of this Article small quantities of goods of a non- commercial nature contained in travellers’  personal 
luggage or sent in small consignments.  
 13. T here shall be no obligation to apply those procedures, as described in this 
Article, to imports of goods put on the market in another country by or with the consent of the right holder, or to goods in transit. 
  
Sub-Section J.4 
Enforcement – Criminal Remedies 
  
Article 15.82  
Criminal Offences  
 
1. Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in cases of wilful trade mark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale.  
 2. For the purpose of this Article, the term “on a commercial scale” includes at least:  
 
(a) acts carried out for commercial advantage or financial gain; and  
 (b) significant acts, not carried out for commercial advantage or financial 
gain, that have a substantial prejudicial impact  on the interests of the 
copyright or related right holder in relation to the marketplace.32 
 
3. Each Party shall treat wilful importation or exportation of counterfeit trade mark goods or pirated copyright goods on a commercial scale as unlawful activities  subject to criminal penalties.
33 
 4. Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied in cases of wilful importation
34 and domestic use, in the course of trade and 
on a commercial scale, of a label or packaging: 35 
 
(a) to which a trade mark has been applied without authorisation that is identical to, or cannot be distinguished from, a trade mark registered in its territory; and  
 (b) that is intended to be used in the course of trade on goods that are identical to goods for which that trade mark is registered.  
 
5. With respect to the offences specified in this Article, each Party shall provide that criminal liability for aiding and abetting is available under its law.   Each 
Party shall also provide that the offences speci fied in this Article are 
applicable in any free trade zones in a Party.  
  
Article 15.83  
Penalties  
 
1. With respect to the offences specified in Article 15.82 (Criminal Offences), 
each Party shall provide for penalties that include imprisonment or monetary fines sufficiently high to provide a deterrent to future acts of infringement, consistent with the level of penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity.  
 
                                                            
32 The Parties agree that a Party may comply with paragraph (b) by addressing those significant acts 
under its criminal procedures and penalties for non -authorised uses of protect ed works, performances 
and phonograms in its law.  The Parties also agree that a Party may provide that the volume and value 
of any infringing items may be  taken into account  in determining whether the act has a substantial 
prejudicial impact on the interests of the copyright or related right holder in relation to the 
marketplace.   
33 A Party may comply with its obligation under this paragraph by providing that distribution or sale 
of counterfeit  trade mark  goods or pirated copyright goods on a commercial sc ale is an unlawful 
activity subject to criminal penalties.   
34 A Party may comply with its obligation relating to importation of labels or packaging through its 
law concerning distribution.   
35 A Party may comply with its obligations under this paragraph by providing for criminal procedures 
and penalties to be applied to attempts to commit a  trade mark  offence.  
 2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to, in 
determining penalties, account for the seriousness of the circumstances, which may include circumstances that involve threats to, or effects on, health or safety.
36 
 
 
Article 15.84  
Seizure, Forfeiture and Destruction  
 1. With respect to the offences specified in Article 15.82 (Criminal Offences), 
each Party shall provide the following: 
 
(a) its judicial or other competent authorities shall have the authority to order the seizure of suspected counterfeit trade mark goods or pirated copyright goods, any related materials and implements used in the commission of the alleged offence, documentary evidence relevant to the alleged offence and assets derived from, or obt ained through the 
alleged infringing activity.  If a Party requires identification of items 
subject to seizure as a prerequisite for issuing a judicial order referred to in this subparagraph, that Party shall not require the items to be described in greate r detail than necessary to identify them for the 
purpose of seizure; 
 (b) its judicial authorities shall have the authority in accordance with that Party’s law to order the forfeiture at least for serious offences, of assets derived from or obtained through the infringing activity;  
 (c) its judicial authorities shall have the authority in accordance with that 
Party’s law to order the forfeiture or destruction of: 
 
(i) all counterfeit trade mark goods or pirated copyright goods; 
 (ii) materials and implements that have been predominantly used in the creation of pirated copyright  goods or counterfeit trade 
mark goods; and 
 (iii) any other labels or packaging to which a counterfeit trade mark  has been applied and that have been used in the 
commission of the offence; and 
 
(d) its judicial or other competent authorities shall have th e authority to 
release or, in the alternative, provide access to, goods, material, implements, and other evidence held by the relevant authority to a right holder for civil infringement proceedings. 
 
                                                            
36 A Party may also account for those circumstances through a separate criminal offence.  
 2. With respect to forfeiture or destruction ordered in accordance with 
paragraph 1(c), each Party shall provide that: 
 
(a) in cases in which destruction of counterfeit trade mark goods or pirated copyright goods is not ordered, the judicial or other competent authorities shall ensure that, except in exceptional circumstances, those goods are disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid causing any harm to the right holder; and 
 (b) in cases in which forfeiture or destruction is ordered, it shall occur without compensation of any kind to the offender. 
 
3. With respect to the offences specified in Article 15.82 (Criminal Offences), 
a Party may provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order the seizure or forfeiture of assets, or alternatively, a fine, the value of which corresponds to the assets derived from, or obtained directly or indirectly through, the infringing activity.  
  
Article 15.85 
Ex Officio  Enforcement  
 
Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the 
authority to act upon their own initiative to initiate legal action with respect to the offences specified in Article 15.82 (Criminal Offences), without the 
need for a formal complaint by a third party or right holder. 
  
Article 15.86 
Liability of Legal Persons  
 
Each Party shall provide that legal persons may incur liability for the 
offences specified in Article 15.82 (Criminal Offences) in accordance with 
its law.  
  
Sub-Section J.5 
Enforcement in the Digital Environment  
  
Article 15.87  
General Obligations on Enforcement in the Digital Environment  
 
1.  Each Party shall provide that the enforcement measures, procedures and remedies, referred to in Sub -Sections J.2  (Enforcement – Civil Remedies) 
and J.4 ( Enforcement – Criminal Remedies), as applicable, are available 
under its law  to the same extent  to proceed against an act of infringement of 
intellectual property rights which takes place in the digital environment.  
  
2.  The Parties recognise the importance of  providing enforcement measures, 
procedures and remedies that, as applicable, apply to the infringement of copyright and related rights over digital networks, including the use of means of widespread distribution for infringing purposes, and to the infringement of  
trade marks, including by users of online services. 
  
Article 15.88  
Limitations on Liability of Internet Service Providers  
 1.  Each Party shall establish or maintain a system that applies in appropriate cases to limit the liability of, or remedies available against, an internet service provider (“ ISP”) for at least copyright and related rights infringement by a 
user of its services.  For greater certainty, a Party may extend this system to 
cover other online service providers and intellectual property rights. 
 2.  Each Party shall ensure that the system established or maintained pursuant to paragraph 1 includes conditions to qualify for the limitation, in accordance with a Party’s law, including, where practicable, requiring the ISP to take action to prevent access to the materials infringing copyright or related rights.  
 3.  This Article shall not affect the possibility of a court or administrative authority, in accordance with the legal system of a Party, requiring the ISP to terminate or prevent an infringement, including by the grant of an injunction pursuant to Article  15.89  (Blocking Orders) .  
  
Article 15.89  
Blocking Orders  
 1.  Each Party shall provide that its civil judicial authorities have the authority to grant an injunction against an ISP within its territory, ordering the ISP to take action to block access to a specific online location, in cases where:  
 
(a)  that online location is located outside the territory of that Party;
37 and 
 (b)  the services of the ISP are used by a third party to infringe copyright or related rights in the territory of that Party.  
 2.  For greater certainty, nothing in this Article precludes a Party from providing that its judicial authorities may grant an injunction to take action to block access to online locations used to infringe intellectual property rights in circumstances other than those specified in paragraph 1. 
  
                                                            
37 A Party may limit the application of this paragraph to on line locations that meet a certain threshold 
of copyright or related rights infringement, or facilitation of that infringement.  
  
  
Article 15.90  
Procedures for Domain Registrars  
 
Each Party shall encourage its domain registry to take appropriate, 
timely, and effective measures to suspend domains used for infringing intellectual property on their respective country -code top- level domains.
38  
That encouragement may be satisfied by measures including the facilitation 
of cooperative arrangements between, the relevant domain registry, law enforcement, and industry groups. 
  
Article 15.91  
Disclosure of Information  
 
A Party may provide, in accordance with its law, that its competent 
authorities
39 may order an ISP to disclose expeditiously to a right holder 
information sufficient to identify a subscriber whose account was allegedly used for infringement, where that right holder has filed a legally sufficient claim of trade mark or copyright or related rights infringement, and where  
that information is being sought for the purpose of protecting or enforcing 
those rights. 
  
Sub-Section J.6 
Enforcement Practices with Respect to Intellectual Property Rights  
  
Article 15.92  
Transparency of Judicial Decisions and Administrative Rulings  
 
Each Party shall provide that final judicial decisions and 
administrative rulings of general application pertaining to the enforcement of intellectual property rights:  
 
(a)  preferably are in writing and state any relevant findings of fact and the reasoning or the legal basis on which the decisions and rulings are based; and  
 
                                                            
38 For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to the independence of each Party’s domain 
registry.  
39 For the purpos es of this Article, “competent authorities” may include the appropriate judicial, 
administrative, or law enforcement authorities under a Party’s law.  
 (b)  are published40 or, if publication is not practicable, otherwise made 
available to the public in a  national language in such a manner as to 
enable interested  persons and the other Party to become acquainted 
with them.  
Article 15.93  
Voluntary Stakeholder Initiatives  
 
Each Party shall endeavour to promote cooperative efforts within the 
business community to effectively address intellectual property 
infringement, including in the digital environment, while preserving 
legitimate competition.  This may include encouraging the establishment of 
public or private advisory groups to address issues of at least trade mark 
counterfeiting and copyright piracy. 
  
Article 15.94  
Public Awareness  
 
Each Party shall, as appropriate, use reasonable efforts to enhance 
public awareness of the importance of respecting intellectual property rights, including in the digital environment, and the detrimental effect of the infringement of intellectual property  rights.  This may include cooperation 
with the business community, civil society organisations, and right holder 
representatives.  
  
Article 15.95  
Specialised Enforcement Expertise, Information and Domestic 
Coordination 
 1.  Each Party shall use reasonable  efforts to develop specialised expertise 
within its competent authorities responsible for the enforcement of intellectual property rights, including with respect to infringement taking place in the digital environment. 
 2.  Each Party shall use reasonable efforts to ensure the coordination between, 
and facilitation of joint actions by, its competent authorities with respect to the enforcement of intellectual property rights, subject to the Party’s available resources.  
  
Article 15.96  
Environmental Considerations in Destruction and Disposal of Infringing 
Goods 
 
                                                            
40 For greater certainty, a Party may satisfy the requirement for publication by making the decision or 
ruling available to the public on the Internet.  
 The Parties recognise the importance of having due regard to 
environmental matters in their enforcement practices relating to the 
destruction and disposal of goods that have been found to infringe intellectual property rights.CHAPTER 16 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT  
  
 
Article 16.1  
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“build-operate- transfer contract ” and “public works concession contract ” 
means a contractual arrangement the primary purpose of which is to provide 
for the construction or rehabilitation of physical infrastructure, plants, buildings, facilities or other government -owned works and under which, as 
consideration for a supplier’s execution of a contractual arrangement, a procuring entity grants to the supplier, for a specified period of time, 
temporary ownership or a right to control and operate, and demand payment 
for the use of those works for the duration of the contract;  “commercial goods or services ” means goods or services of a type generally 
sold or offered for sale in the commercial marketplace to, and customarily purchased by, non-governmental buyers for non-governmental purposes; 
 
“construction service” means a service that has as its objective the realis ation  
by whatever means of civil or building works, based on Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional Central Product Classification (CPC);  
“electronic auction ” means an iterative process that involves the use of  
electronic means for the presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or 
new values for quantifiable non- price elements of the tender related to the 
evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or re-ranking of tenders;  
“in writing ” or “ written ” means any worded or numbered expression that can 
be read, reproduced and later communicated. It may include electronically 
transmitted and stored information;  
 “limited tendering ” means a procurement method whereby the procuring 
entity contacts a supplier or suppliers of its choice;  “multi- use list ” means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has 
determined satisfy the conditions for participation in that list, and that the 
procuring entity intends to use more than once;  
 “notice of intended procurement” means a notice published by a procuring 
entity inviting interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a 
tender, or both;  “offset ” means any condition or undertaking that encourages local 
development or improves a Party's balanc e-of- payments accounts, such as 
the use of domestic content, the licensing of technology, investment, counter -
trade and similar action or requirement;  
 “open tendering” means a procurement method whereby all interested 
suppliers may submit a tender; 
 
“procuring entity” means an entity  listed in  Annex 16A; 
 “qualified supplier ” means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as 
having satisfied the conditions for participation; 
 
“selective tendering ” means a procurement method whereby the procuring 
entity invites only qualified suppliers to submit a tender;  “services” includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;  
 
“standard” means a document approved by a recognised body that provides 
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods 
or services, or related processes and production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory.  It may also include or deal exclusively with 
terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements as they 
apply to a good, service, process or production method;  
 
“supplier” means a person or group of persons that provides or could provide  
a good or service to a procuring entity; and  
“technical specification ” means a tendering requirement that: 
 
(a) sets out the characteristics of : 
 
(i) goods to be procured, including quality, performance, 
safety and dimensions, or the processes and methods 
for their production; or 
 (ii) services to be procured, or the processes or methods for their provision, including any applicable administrative provisions; or  
 (b) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or 
labelling requirements, as they apply to a good or service. 
 
 
Article 16.2 
Scope  
 Application of Chapter  
 1. This Chapter applies to any measure regarding covered
 procurement.  
 
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, “ covered procurement ” means  government 
procurement:   
 
(a) of  a good, service , or any combination thereof as specified in each 
Party's  Schedule to Annex 16A; 
 
(b) by any contractual means, including: purchase; rental , lease or  hire 
purchase , with or without an option to buy ; build -operate- transfer 
contracts and public works concessions contracts;  
 (c) for which the value, as estimated in accordance with paragraphs  8 and 
9, equals or exceeds the relevant threshold specified in a Party's Schedule to Annex 16A , at the time of publication of a notice in 
accordance with Article 16.6 (Notices); 
 (d) by a procuring entity; and 
 
(e)
 that is not otherwise excluded fro m coverage under this Agreement. 
 
Activities Not Covered  
 
3. Unless otherwise provided in a Party's Schedule to Annex 16A, this Chapter 
does not apply to: 
 
(a) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other 
immovable property or the rights thereon;  
 (b) non- contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party , 
including its procuring entities, provides, including cooperative agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees , and fiscal 
incentives;  
 
(c) the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services, 
liquidation and management services for regulated financial  
 institutions or services related to the sale, redemption and distribution 
of public debt, including loans and government bonds, notes and other securities;  
 (d) public employment contracts;  
(e) procurement conducted: 
 
(i) for the specific purpose of provi ding international assistance, 
including development aid; 
 (ii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international 
agreement relating to the stationing of troops or relating to the joint implementation by the signatory countries of a project; or 
 
(iii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international 
organisation, or funded by international grants, loans or other assistance if the applicable procedure or condition would be inconsistent with this Chapter.  
 
Schedules 
 
4. Each Party  shall specify the following information in its Schedule to Annex 
16A: 
 
(a) in Section A , the central government entities whose procurement is 
covered by this Chapter; 
 (b) in Section B, the sub -central government entities whose procurement 
is covered by this Chapter; 
 
(c) in Section C , other entities whose procurement is covered by this 
Chapter; 
 
(d) in Section D, the goods covered by this Chapter;  
(e) in Section E , the services, other than construction services, covered 
by this Chapter; 
 
(f) in Section F, the construction services covered by this Chapter;  
 (g) in Section G, any General Notes; 
 
(h) in Section H, the applicable Threshold Adjustment Formula; and  
  
(i) in Section I , the publication of information required under paragraph 
2 of Article 16.5 ( Information on the Procurement System ). 
 
Compliance  
5.
 Each Party shall ensure that its procuring entities comply with this Chapter 
in conducting covered procurements.  
 6. No procuring entity shall prepare or design a procurement, or otherwise  
structure or divide a procurement into separate procurements in any stage of the procurement, or  use a particular method to estimate the value of a 
procurement, in order to avoid the obligations of this Chapter.  
 7. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party, including its procuring entities, from developing new procurement polici es, procedures or 
contractual means, provided that they are not inconsistent with this Chapter. 
 
Valuation 
 8.
 In estimating the value of a procurement for the purposes of ascertaining 
whether it is a covered procurement, a procuring entity shall  include the 
estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its entire duration, 
taking into account : 
 
(a) all forms of remuneration, including any premium , fee, commission, 
interest or other revenue stream that may be provided for under the 
contract; 
 (b) the value of any option clause ; and 
 (c)  any contract awarded at the same time or over a given period to one or more suppliers under the same procurement. 
 
9.
 If the total estimated maximum value of a procurement over its entire duration is not known, the procurement shall be deemed a covered procurement, unless otherwise excluded under this Agreement.  
  
Article 16.3 
General Exceptions  
 
1. Subject to the requirement that the measure is not applied in a manner that 
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between  
the Parties where the same conditions prevail , or a disguised restriction on  
 international trade  between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be 
construed to prevent a Party , including its procuring entities , from adopting 
or maintaining a measure: 
 
(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety; 
 
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; 
 
(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or  
 (d) relating to the good or service of a person with disabilities, of 
philanthropic institutions or of prison  labour. 
 
2. The Parties understand that subparagraph 1(b) includes environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.  
 
 
Article 16.4 
General Principles  
 
National Treatment and Non -Discrimination  
 1. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, each Party, 
including its procuring entities, shall accord immediately and unconditionally 
to the goods and services of the other Party and to the suppliers of the other Party, treatment no less favo urable than the treatment that the Party, 
including its procuring entities, accords to domestic goods, services, and 
suppliers. 
 
2. With respect to any measure regarding covered  procurement, neither Party , 
including its procuring entities, shall:  
 
(a) treat a locally established supplier less favourably than another locally established supplier on the basis  of the degree of foreign 
affiliation or ownership; or 
 (b) discrimi nate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the 
good or service  offered by that supplier for a particular procurement 
is a good or service of the other Party.  
 
3. All orders under contracts awarded for covered procurement shall be subject 
to paragraphs 1 and 2.  
 Use of Electronic Means  
 
4. When conducting covered procurement, a procuring entity shall use electronic means: 
 
(a) for the publication of notices; and 
 (b) to the widest extent practicable, for information exchange and 
communication, the publication of tender documentation in 
procurement procedures, and for the submission of tenders. 
 
5. When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring entity shall: 
 
(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology systems and software, including those related to 
authentication and encryption of information, that are generally 
available and interoperable with other generally available information technology systems and software; and 
 (b) establish and  maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of  
information provided by suppliers, including requests for 
participation and tenders, including establishment of the time of receipt a nd the prevention of inappropriate access. 
 
Conduct of Procurement  
 
6. A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and 
impartial manner that:  
 
(a)
 is consistent with this Chapter , using methods such as open tendering, 
selective tendering , and limited tendering;  
 (b) avoids conflicts of interest; and  
 (c) prevents corrupt practices. 
 
Rules of Origin  7. For purposes of covered procurement, a Party shall not apply rules of origin to goods or services imported from or supplied from the other  Party that are 
different from the rules of origin the Party applies at the same time in the normal course of trade to imports or supplies of the same goods or services 
from the same Party.  
 Offsets  
 
8. With regard to covered procurement, neither Party , including its procuring 
entities, shall  seek, take account of, impose or enforce any offset , at any stage 
of a procurement. 
 
Measures Not Specific to Procurement  
 
9. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to: customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on, or in connection with, importation, the method of levying those duties and charges , other import regulations or  formalities , and measures 
affecting trade in services other than measures governing covered procurement. 
  
Article 16.5 
Information on the Procurement System  
 1. Each Party shall : 
 
(a) promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision, administrative ruling of general application, standard contract clause 
mandated by law or regulation and incorporated by reference in 
notices or tender documentation and procedure s regarding covered 
procurement, and any modifications thereof, in an officia lly 
designated electronic or paper medium that is widely disseminated and remains readily accessible to the public; and  
 (b) provide an explanation thereof to the other Party, on request.  
2. Each Party shall list in Section I of its Schedule to Annex 16A :  
 
(a) the electronic or paper media in which the Party publishes the information described in paragraph 1; and 
 (b) the electronic media in which the Party publishes the notices required by Article 16 .6 (Notices), paragraph 8 of Article 16.8 ( Qualification 
of Suppliers), and paragraph 2 of Article 16.15 ( Transparency of 
Procurement Information ).  
 Article 16.6 
Notices  
 
Electronic Publication of Procurement Notices  
 
1. For covered procurement, notice s of intended procurement and notice s of 
planned procurement shall be directly accessible by electronic means, free of charge:   
 
(a)
 for central government entities that are covered under Annex 16A , 
through a single point of acces s, as listed in Section I  of its Schedule 
to Annex 16A; and 
 (b) for sub- central government entities and other entities covered under  
Annex 16A , at least, through links in a single electronic portal, as 
listed in Section I of its Schedule to Annex 16A .  If a Party maintains 
multiple points of access , it shall limit the number of  points of access 
to the extent possible.  
 
Notice of Intended Procurement  
 2. For each covered procurement, except in the circumstances described in 
Article 16.12  (Limited Tendering),  a procuring entity shall publish a notice 
of intended procurement.  The notice shall remain readily accessible to the 
public, until at least the expiration of the time  period indicated in the notice .  
 3. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended 
procurement shall include : 
 
(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information 
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the procurement; 
 (b) a description of the procurement, including  the nature and the 
quantity of  the goods or services to be procured , or the estimated 
quantity if the quantity is not know n, and a description of any options ; 
 
(c) for recurring contracts, an estimate, if possible, of the timing of 
subsequent notices of intended procurement;  
 (d) the time-frame for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the 
contract;  
 
(e) the procurement method that will be used and whether it will involve 
negotiation or electronic auction;  
 (f) if applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of 
requests for participation in the procurement; 
 (g) the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;  (h) the language or languages in which tenders or requests for 
participation may be submitted, if they may be submitted in a 
language other than an official language of the Party of the procuring entity; 
 (i) a list and  a brief description of any conditions for participation of 
suppliers, including any requirements for specific documents or 
certifications to be provided by suppliers in connection therewith, 
unless those requirements are included in tender documentation that 
is made available to all interested s uppliers at the same time as the 
notice of intended procurement; and 
 (j) if, pursuant to Article 16 .8 (Qualification of Suppliers), a procuring 
entity intends to select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be invited to tender, the criteria that will be used to select them and, if 
applicable, any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender. 
 
Notice of Planned Procurement  4. Procuring entities are encouraged to publish as early as possible in each fiscal year a notice regarding their future procurement plans ( notice of planned 
procurement), which  should include the subject -matter of the procurement 
and the planned date of publication of the notice of intended procurement. 
  
Article 16.7 
Conditions for Participation  
 
1. A procuring entity shall limit any conditions for participation in a  covered 
procurement to those  that are essential to  ensure that a supplier has the legal 
and financial capacities and the commercial and technical abilities to 
undertake the relevant procurement.  
 
2. In establishing the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:  
(a) shall not impose the condition that, in order for  a supplier to 
participate in a procurement, the supplier has previously been 
awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity of a  Party or that  
 the supplier has prior work experience in the territory of that Party;  
and 
 
(b) may require relevant prior experience if essential to meet the requirements of the procurement. 
 
3. In assessing whether a supplier satisfies the conditions for participation, a 
procuring entity  shall : 
 
(a) evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical abilities o f a supplier on the basis of that supplier's business activities 
both inside and outside the territory of the Party of the procuring entity; and 
 (b) base its evaluation on the conditions  that the procuring entity has 
specified in advance in notices or tender documentation. 
 
4. If there is supporting evidence, a Party, including its procuring entities, may 
exclude a supplier on grounds such as: 
 
(a) bankruptcy; 
 
(b) false declarations;  
 
(c) significant or persistent deficiencies in  the performance of any 
substantive requirement or obligation under a prior contract or 
contracts;  
 (d) final judgments in respect of serious crimes or other serious offences;  
 (e) professional misconduct or acts or omissions that adversely reflect on 
the commercial integrity of the supplier;  or 
 (f) failure to pay taxes.  
  
Article 16.8 
Qualification of Suppliers  
 
Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures  1. A Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier registration 
system under which interested suppliers are required to register and provide 
certain information.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that:  
 
(a) its procuring entities make efforts to minimis e differences in their 
qualification  procedures; and 
 
(b) if its procuring entities maintain registration systems, the entities 
make efforts to minimis e differences in their registration systems.  
 
3. Neither Party, including its procuring entities, shall:  
 
(a) adopt or apply any registration system or qualification procedure with 
the purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to the 
participation of suppliers of the other Party in its procurement; or 
 (b) use that registration system or qualification procedure to prevent or 
delay  the inclusion of suppliers of the other Party on a list of suppliers 
or prevent those suppliers from being considered for a particular procurement. 
 
4. If a Party or a procuring entity maintains a supplier registration system, it shall:  
 
(a) ensure that interested suppliers have access to information on the registration system through electronic means and that interested suppliers may request registration at any time; and  
 (b) if a request by a supplier is made, inform the supplier within a 
reasonable period of time of the decision to grant or reject this 
request , and if rejected, on request provide an explanation.  
 
Selective Tendering  
 5.
 If a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the procuring entity 
shall:  
 
(a) include in the notice of intended procurement  at least the information 
specified in  subparag raphs 3(a) , 3(b), 3(e), 3(f), 3(i)  and 3(j)  of 
Article 16.6 (Notices)  and invite suppliers to submit a request for 
participation; and  
 (b)
 provide, by the commencement of the time -period for tendering, at 
least the information in subparagraphs 3(c), 3(d), 3(g) and 3(h) of 
Article 16.6 (Notices) to the qualified suppliers that it notifies as 
specified in subparagraph 3(b) of Article 16.10 (Time -Periods).  
 6. A procuring entity shall allow all qualified suppliers to participate in a 
particular procurement, unless the procuring entity states in the notice of intended procurement any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitte d to tender and the criteria for selecting the limited number of 
suppliers. 
 
7. If the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of 
publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 5, the procuring entity shall 
ensure that the ten der documentation is  made available at the same time to 
all the qualified suppliers selected in accordance with paragraph 6.  
 
Multi- Use Lists  
 
8. A Party, including its procuring entities  may establish or  maintain a multi-
use list provided that  it makes continuously available  by electronic means, in 
the appropriate medium listed in its Schedule to Annex 16A , a notice inviting 
interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list. 
 9. The notice provided for in paragraph 8 shall include:  
(a) a description of the goods  or services, or categories thereof, for which 
the list may be used;  
 (b) the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion on the list and the methods that the procuring entity  or other 
government agency will use to verify a supplier ’s satisfaction of those 
conditions; 
 (c) the name and address of the procuring entity or other government 
agency  and other information necessary to contact the procuring 
entity and to  obtain all relevant documents relating to  the list; and 
 
(d) the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or 
termination, or if the period of validity is not provided, an indication of the method by which notice will be given of the termination of use of the list. 
 
10.  A Party, including its procuring entities, that establishes or maintains a multi-
use list, shall:  
 
(a) allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion on the multi -use list; 
and  
 (b) include on the list, within a reasonable period of time, all suppliers 
that satisfy the conditions for participation set out in the notice referred to in paragraph 6. 
 
11. If a supplier that is not included on a multi -use list submits a request for 
participation in a procurement based on the multi -use list and submits all 
required documents, within the time period provided for in  paragraph 2 of 
Article 16.10  (Time -Periods), a procuring entity shall examine the request.   
The procuring entity shall not exclude the supplier from consideration in respect of the procurement on the grounds that the entity has insufficient time 
to examine the request, unless, in exceptional cases, due to the complexity of 
the procurement, the  procuring entity is not able to complete the examination 
of the request within the time period allowed for the submission of tenders. 
 Section B and Section C Entities  
 
12. A procuring entity covered under  Sections B (Sub- Central Government 
Entities) or C (Other Entities) of a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  may use 
a notice inviting suppliers to apply for inclusion on a multi -use list as a notice 
of intended procurement, provided that:  
 
(a) the notice is published in accordance with paragraph 8 and includes the information required under paragraph 9, as much of the 
information required under  paragraph 3 of Article 16.6 (Notices)  as 
is available and a statement that it constitutes a notice of intended 
procurement or that only the suppliers on the multi -use list will 
receive further notices of procurement covered by the multi -use list; 
and 
 (b) the entity promptly provides to suppliers that have expressed an interest in a given  procurement to the entity, sufficient information to 
permit them to assess their interest in the procurement, including all 
remaining information required in paragraph 3 of Article 16.6 
(Notices), to the extent that information is available.  
 
13. A procuring entity covered under Sections B (Sub- Central Government 
Entities) or C (Other Entities) of a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  may allow 
a supplier that has applied for inclusion on a multi -use list in accordance with 
paragraph 11 to tender in a given procurement, if there is sufficient time for 
the procuring entity to examine whether the supplier satisfies the conditions 
for participation.  
 Information on Procuring Entity Decisions 
 14. A procuring entity or other entity of a Party shall promptly inform any 
supplier that submits a request for participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi -use list of the decision with respect to the 
request or application.  
 15. If a procuring entity  or other entity of a Party reject s a supplier’s request for 
participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi -use list, 
ceases to recogni se a supplier as qualified, or removes a supplier from a 
multi- use list, the entity shall promptly inform the supplier and, on request of 
the supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written explanation of the reasons for its decision. 
  
Article 16.9 
Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation  
 
Technical Specifications  1. A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt  or apply any technical 
specification or prescribe any conf ormity assessment procedure with the 
purpose or effect of creating an unnecessary obstacle to trade between the 
Parties. 
 2. In prescribing the technic al specifications for the good or service  being 
procured, a procuring entity shall, if appropriate:  
 
(a) set out the technical specifications in terms of performance and 
functional requirements, rather than design or descriptive characteristics; and  
 
(b) base the technical specifications on international standards, if these 
exist; otherwise, on national technical regulations, recognised 
national standards or building codes. 
 
3. If design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical specifications, 
a procuring entity should indicate, if appropriate, that it will consider tenders 
of equivalent goods or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the procurement by including words such as "or equivalent" in the tender documentation. 
 4. A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or 
refer to a particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, 
specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently  
 precise or intellig ible way of describing the procurement requirements and 
provided that, in these  cases, the procuring entity includes words such as "or 
equivalent" in the tender documentation. 
 
5. A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the  
effect of precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation 
or adoption of any technical specification for a specific procurement from a 
person that may have a commercial interest in the procurement.  
 6. For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may, in 
accordance with this Article, prepare, adopt or apply  technical specifications 
to promote the conservation of natural resources or protect the environment. 
 7. For greater certainty, this Chapter is not in tended to preclude a Party, or its 
procuring entities, from preparing, adopting or applying technical specifications required to protect sensitive government information, 
including specifications that may affect or limit the storage, hosting or 
processing of that information outside the territory of the Party . 
 Tender Documentation  8. A procuring entity shall  make available to  suppliers tender documentation 
that includes all information necessary to permit suppliers  to prepare and 
submit responsive tenders . Unless already provided in the notice of intended 
procurement, that documentation shall include a complete description of: 
 
(a) the procurement, including the nature, and the quantity of the good or 
service to be procured or, if the quantity is not known, the estimated 
quantity and any requirements to be fulfilled, including any technical specifications, conformity assessment certification , plans, drawings 
or instructional materials;  
 
(b) any conditions for participation, including information and 
documents that suppliers are required to submit; 
 (c) all evaluation criteria the entity will apply in the awarding of the 
contract, and t he relative importance of  those criteria;  
 (d) if the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic means, any authentication and encryption requirements or other requirements related to the submission of information by electronic means;  
 (e) if the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules, 
including identification of the elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, on which the auction will be conducted; 
 (f) if there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time and place for the opening and, if appropriate, the persons authorised to be 
present;  
 
(g) any other terms or conditions , including terms of payment and any 
limitation on the means by which tenders may be submitted, such as whether on paper or by electronic means; and 
 (h) any date for the delivery of a good or the supply of a service. 
 
9. In establishing any date for the delivery of a good or the supply of a service  
being procured, a procuring entity shall take into account f actors such as the 
complexity of the procurement , the extent of subcontracting anticipated and 
the realistic time required for production, de -stocking and transport of goods 
from the point of supply or for supply of services. 
 10. The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or te nder 
documentation may include, among others, price and other cost factors, 
quality, technical merit, environmental characteristics and terms of delivery.  
 
11. A procuring entity shall promptly: 
 
(a) make available tender documentation to ensure that interested 
suppliers have sufficient time to submit responsive tenders; 
 
(b) provide, on request, the tender documentation to any interested supplier; and  
 
(c) reply to any reasonable request for relevant information by an 
interested or participating supplier, provided that the information 
does not give that supplier an advantage over other suppliers. 
 
Modifications  
12. If, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the criteria or 
requirements set out in a notice of intended procurement or tender 
documentation provided to a participating supplier, or amends or reissues a notice or tender documentation, it shall transmit in writing all those modifications or the amended or re-issued notice or tender documentation:  
 (a) to all suppliers that are participating in the procurement at the time of 
the modification, amendment or re -issuance, if those suppliers are 
known to the  procuring enti ty, and in all other cases, in the same 
manner as the original information was made available; and  
 
(b) in adequate time to allow  those suppliers to modify and re -submit  
their initial tenders, as appropriate. 
 
Preliminary Market Research and Engagement  13. For greater certainty, a procuring entity may , prior to publication of a notice 
of intended procurement, conduct market  research and engagement  with 
suppliers with a view to informing and developing technical specifications 
and other tender documentation for  a particular procurement or informing 
suppliers of its procurement plans and requirements.   A procuring entity shall 
take appropriate steps to ensure that suppliers participating in that market 
research or engagement do not gain an  unfair advantage over other interested 
suppliers.  
  
Article 16.10  
Time -Periods  
 
General  
 1. A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs, provide sufficient time for suppliers to prepare and submit requests  for participation 
and responsive tenders, taking into account factors such as : 
 
(a) the nature and complexity of the procurement; 
 (b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and 
 
(c) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non- electronic means 
from foreign as well as domestic points if electronic means are not 
used. 
 
Deadlines  2. A procuring entity that uses selective tendering shall establish that the final date for the submission of  requests for participation shall not, in principle, be 
less than 25 days from the date of publication of the notice of intended procurement.  I f a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity 
renders this time -period impracticable, the time -period may be reduced to no 
less than 10 days.  
 3. Except as provided for in paragraphs 4, 5, 8 and 9 a procuring entity shall 
establish that the final date for the submission of te nders shall not be less than 
40 days from the date on which: 
 
(a) in the case of open tendering, the notice of intended procurement is 
published; or 
 (b) in the case of selective tendering , the procuring entity notifies the 
suppliers that they will be invited to submit tenders , whether or not it 
uses a multi -use list.  
 
4. A procuring e ntity may reduce the time -period for tendering set out in  
paragraph 3 to no less than 10 days if: 
 
(a) the procuring entity has published a notice of planned procurement under Article 16.6 (Notices)  at least 40 days and no more than 12 
months in advance of the publication of the notice of intended procurement, and the notice of planned procurement contains: 
 
(i) a description of the procurement; 
 (ii) the approximate final dates for the submission of tenders or 
requests for participation; 
 
(iii) a statement that interested suppliers should express their interest in the procurement to the procuring entity; 
 
(iv) the address from which documents relating to the 
procurement may be obtained; and 
 (v) as much of the information that is required for the notice of intended procurement under paragraph 3 of  Article 16.6 
(Notices) as is available;  
 
(b) the procuring entity, for recurring contracts, indicates in an initial notice of intended procurement that subsequent notices will provide 
time-periods for tendering based on this paragraph; or 
 (c) a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity renders the time period for tendering set out in paragraph 3 impracticable . 
 
5. A procuring entity may reduce the time-period for tendering set out in  
paragraph 3 by five days for each one of the following circumstances: 
 
(a) the notice of intended procurement is published by electronic means;  
  
(b) the tender documentation is made available by electronic means from the date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement; and  
 (c) the procuring entity accepts tenders by electronic means.  
 
6. The use of paragraph 5, in conjunction with paragraph 4, shall in no case 
result in the reduction of the time -period for tendering set out in  paragraph 3 
to less than 10 days from the date on which the notice of intended procurement is published. 
 
7. A procuring entity shall require all interested or participating suppliers to 
submit requests for participation or tenders in accordance  with a common 
deadline.  These time periods, and any extension of these time periods, shall be the same for all interested or participating suppliers.  
 
8. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article, if a procuring entity 
purchases commercial good s or services, or any combination thereof, it may 
reduce the time -period for tendering established in accordance with 
paragraph 3 to not less than 13 days, provided that it publishes by electronic means, at the same time, both the notice of intended procurement and the tender documentation.  In addition, if the entity accepts tenders for 
commercial goods or services by electronic means, it may reduce the time-period established in accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than 10 days. 
 9. If a procuring entity covered under Sections B (Sub- Central Government 
Entities) or C (Other Entities) of a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  has 
selected all or a limited number of qualified suppliers, the time -period for 
tendering may be fixed by agreement between the procuring entity and the selected suppliers.   In the absence of agreement, the period shall not be less 
than 10 days. 
 
 
Article 16.11  
Negotiations 
 
1. A Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations if: 
 
(a) the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in 
the notice of intended procurement required under paragraph 2 of 
Article 16.6 (Notices); or  
 (b) it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the most 
advantageous in terms of the specific evalu ation criteria set out in the 
notice of intended procurement or tender documentation.  
 2. A procuring entity shall: 
 
(a) ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is carried out in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the 
notice of intended procurement or tender documentation; and 
 
(b) when  negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the 
remaining participating suppliers to submit any new or revised 
tenders.  
  
Article 16.12  
Limited Tendering  
 
1. Provided that it does not use this provision for the purpose of avoiding competition  among suppliers  or in a manner that discriminates against 
suppliers of the other Party, or protects domestic suppliers , a procuring entity 
may use limited tendering and may choose not to apply Articles 16.6 
(Notices) through 16.8 (Qualification of Suppliers), paragraphs 8 through 12 
of Article  16.9 (Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation) , and 
Articles  16.10  (Time -Periods), 16.11  (Negotiations), 16.13  (Electronic 
Auctions) and 16.14 ( Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts ) only 
under any of the following circumstances: 
 
(a) if: 
 
(i) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested 
participation; 
 
(ii) no tenders  were submitted  that conform to the essential 
requirements in  the tender documentation;  
 
(iii) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or 
 
(iv) the tenders submitted were  collusive,  
 provided that the requirements of the tender documentation are not 
substantially modified ; 
 
(b) if the  good or service  can be supplied only by a particular supplier 
and no reasonable alternative or substitute good or service exists  for 
any of the following reasons: 
 
(i) the requirement is for a work of art;  
 (ii) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; 
or 
 (iii) due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;  
 
(c) for additional deliveries by the original supplier  of goods or services 
that were not included in the initial procurement if a change of supplier for those additional goods or services: 
 
(i) cannot be made for  technical reasons such as requirements of 
interchangeability or interoperability with existing 
equipment, software, services or installations procured under 
the initial procurement; and  
 (ii) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs for the procuring entity; 
 
(d) for goods purchased on a commodity market;  (e) if a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that is intended for limited trial or that is  developed at its request  in 
the course of, and for, a particular contract for research, experiment, 
study or original development.  Original development of a prototype 
or a first good or service may include limited production or supply in 
order to incorporate the results of field testing and to demonstrate  that 
the prototype of the  first good or service is suitable for production or 
supply in quantity to acceptable quality standards, but does not 
include quantity production or supply to establish commercial 
viability or to recover research and development c osts.  Subsequent 
procurements of these newly developed goods or services, however, shall be subject to this Chapter ; 
 
(f) for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that 
only arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals  such 
as those arising from liquidation, bankruptcy or receivership , but not 
for routine purchases from regular suppliers;  
 
(g) if a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:  
 
(i) the contest has been organised in a manner  that is consistent 
with this Chapter; and  
 
(ii) the contest is judged  by an independent jury with a view to  
award  a design contract to the winner; or  
 (h) in so far as is strictly necessary if, for reasons of extreme urgency 
brought about by events unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the good or service could not be obtained in time by means of open or selective tendering.  
 
2. A procuring entity shall prepare a report in writing on each contract awarded 
under paragraph 1.  The report shall include  the name of the procuring entity, 
the value and kind of  good or service  procured, and a statement that indicates  
the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 1 that justified the 
use of limited tendering. 
 
 
Article 16.13  
Electronic Auctions 
 
If a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an 
electronic auction, the entity shall provide each participant, before 
commencing the electronic auction, with:  (a) the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, that is based on the evaluation criteria set out in the tender documentation and that will be used in the automatic ranking or re -
ranking during the auction; 
 (b) the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of its tender if the contract is to be awarded on the basis of the most advantageous tender; and 
 (c) any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction. 
 
 
Article 16.14  
Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts  
 Treatment of Tenders  
 1. A procuring entity shall receive, open and treat all tenders under procedures 
that guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement process, and the confidentiality of tenders.  
 2. A procuring entity shall not penali se any supplier whose tender is received 
after the time specified for receiving tenders if the delay is due solely to mishandling on the part of the procuring entity.  
 3. If a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct 
unintentional errors of form between the opening of tenders and the awarding  
of the contract, the procuring entity shall provide the same opportunity to all participating suppliers.  
 Awarding of Contracts 
 
4. To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and shall, at the time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and tender documentation and be submitted by a supplier who 
satisfies the conditions for participation. 
 5. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a co ntract, it shall award the contract to the supplier that the procuring 
entity has determined to be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based solely on the evaluation criteria specified in the notice  and tender 
documentation, submits: 
 
(a) the most advantageous tender; or 
 (b) if price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.  
 
6. If a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower than the prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the supplier that it satisfies the conditions for participation and is capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract.  
 
7. A procuring entity shall not use opti ons, cancel a covered procurement, or 
modify  or terminate awarded contracts in a manner that circumvents  the 
obligations of this C hapter. 
 
 
Article 16.15  
Transparency of Procurement Information   
 Information Provided to Suppliers  
 
1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating suppliers of the  
contract award  decision  and, on the request of a supplier, shall do so in 
writing. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.16 (Disclosure of 
Information) , a procuring entity shall, on request, provide an unsuccessful 
supplier with an explanation of the reasons why the entity did not select its 
tender and the relative advantages of the successful supplier's tender.  
 Publication of Award Information 
 2. Not later than 72 days after the award of each contract covered by this Chapter, a procuring entity shall publish a  notice in an appropriate electronic 
medium  listed in Annex 16A  and the information  shall remain readily 
accessible for a reasonable period of time.  The notice  shall include at least 
the following information: 
 
(a) a description of the good or service procured; 
 (b) the name and address of the procuring entity; 
 
(c) the name and address of the successful supplier;  
 (d) the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken into account in the award of the contract; 
 (e) the date of award; and  
 (f) the procurement method used, and in cases where limited tendering was used in accordance with Article 16.12 (Limited Tendering) , a 
description of the circumstances justifying the use of limited 
tendering. 
 
Maintenance of  Documentation, Reports and Electronic Traceability 
 
3. Each procuring entity shall, for a period of at least three years from the date 
it awards a contract, maintain:  
 
(a) the documentation and reports of tendering procedures and contract 
awards relating to covered procurement, including the reports required under Article 16.12 (Limited Tendering); and 
 (b) data that ensure the appropriate traceability of the conduct of cove red 
procurement by electronic means.  
  
Article 16.16  
Disclosure of Information  
 
Provision of Information to Parties  1. On request of the other Party, a Party shall provide promptly any information 
necessary  to determine  whether a procurement was conducted  fairly, 
impartially and in accordance with this Chapter, including  information on the  
 characteristics and relative advantages of the successful tender . In cases 
where release of the information would prejudice competition in future 
tenders,  the Party that receives the information shall not disclose it to any 
supplier, except after consulting with, and obtaining the agreement of  the 
Party that provided the information. 
 
Non-Disclosure of Information  
 
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including its procuring entities, shall not provide to any particular supplier  information 
that might prejudice fair competition between suppliers.  
 3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party, including its 
procuring entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential information if that disclosure:  
 
(a) would impede law enforcement;  
 (b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;  
 (c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons, including the protection of intellectual property; or 
 (d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.  
 
Article 16.17  
Environmental, Social and Labour Considerations  
 
A Party, including its procuring entities, may:  (a) take into account environmental, social and labour considerations  
throughout the procurement  procedure, provided they are : 
 
(i) based on objectively verifiable criteria; 
 
(ii) non- discriminatory ; and  
 (iii) indicated in the notice of intended procurement or tender documentation; and  
 (b) take appropriate measures to ensure compliance with its obligations in the fields of environmental , social and labour law, provided they 
are non- discriminatory .  
 Article 16.18  
Ensuring Integrity in Procurement Practices  
 
1. Each Party shall ensure that criminal or administrative measures exist to 
address corruption, fraud, and other illegal acts in its government 
procurement.  
 2. These measures may include procedures to render ineligible for , or exclude 
from,  participation in the Party’s procurements, either indefinitely or for a 
stated period of time, suppliers that the Party has determined to have engaged in corrupt,  fraudulent or other illegal  acts in relation to government 
procurement in the Party’s territory . When applying those procedures, each 
party, including its procuring entities:  
 
(a) may consider  the gravity of the  supplier’s acts or omissions, and any 
remedial measures or mitigating factors ; and 
 
(b) shall treat a supplier of the other Party with due process, in accordance 
with its  government procurement policies and frameworks. 
 
3. Each Party shall also ensure that it has in place policies and procedures to 
eliminate to the extent possible or manage any potential conflict of interest 
on the part of those engaged in or having influence over a procurement. 
 
4. Each Party may put in place policies or procedures that require successful 
suppliers to maintain and enforce appropriate measures, such as internal 
controls, business ethics, and compliance program mes, for preventing and 
detecting corruption, fraud, and other illegal acts, provided they are  non-
discriminatory . 
  
Article 16.19  
Domestic Review Procedures 
 
1. Each Party shall maintain, establish or designate at least one impartial 
administrative or judicial authority (" review authority ") that is independent 
of its procuring entities to review, in a non- discriminatory, timely, 
transparent and effective manner, a challenge or com plaint ( "complaint" ) by 
a supplier that there has been : 
 
(a) a breach of this Chapter; or 
 (b) if the supplier does not have a right to directly challenge  a breach of  
this Chapter under the law of a Party, a failure  of a procuring entity 
to comply with the  Party's measures implementing this Chapter,  
  
arising in the context of a covered procurement, in which the supplier has, or had, an interest.   The procedural rules for all complaints  shall be in writing 
and made generally available.  
2. In the event of a complaint by a supplier, arising in the context of covered 
procurement in which the supplier has, or  had, an interest, that there has been 
a breach  or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, the Party of the procuring 
entity conducting the procurement shall encourage  the procuring  entity and 
the supplier to seek resolution of the complaint through consultations.  Th e 
procuring entity shall accord im partial and timely consideration to the 
complaint in a manner that is not prejudicial to the supplier's participation in 
ongoing or future procurement or to its right to seek corrective measures 
under the administrative or judicial review procedure.  
 3. Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient period of time to prepare and 
submit a challenge, which in no case shall be less than 10 days from the time 
when the basis of the challenge became known or reasonably should have become known to the supplier.  
 4. If a body other than the review  authority initially reviews a complaint , the 
Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision to the 
review authority  that is independent of the procuring entity whose 
procurement is the subject of the complaint. 
 5 If the review authority has determined that there has been a breach or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, a Party may limit compensation for the loss or 
damages suffered to either the costs reasonably incurred in the preparation of 
the tender or in bringing the complaint, or both. 
 6. Each Party shall ensure that  a review body that is not a court  shall have its 
decision subject to judicial review or have procedures that provide that: 
 
(a) a procuring entity shall respond in writing to a supplier’s complaint  
and provide all relevant documents to the review authority; 
 (b) a supplier that initiates a complaint shall be provided an opportunity 
to reply to the procuring entity’s response before the review authority 
takes a decision on the com plaint;  
 (c) the participants shall have the right to be represented and accompanied;  
 
(d) the participants shall have access to all proceedings;  
 (e) the participants shall have the right to request that the proceedings 
take place in public and that witnesses may be presented; and  
 (f) the review authority shall provide its decisions or recommendations 
in a timely fashion, in writing, with  an explanation of the basis for 
each decision or recommendation. 
  
7. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for:  
(a) prompt interim measures  to preserve the supplier's opportunity to 
participate in the procurement; and 
 (b) corrective action that may include compensation under paragraph 5.  The procedures may provide that overriding adverse consequences for the 
interests concerned, including the public interest, may be taken into account 
when deciding whether those measures should be applied.  Just cause for not 
acting shall be provided in writing.  
 
Article 16.20  
Modifications and Rectifications  to Annex   
 
1. A Party may modify or rectify its Schedule to Annex 16A, pursuant to 
paragraphs 2 through 10. 
 Notification of Proposed Modification  2. A Party shall notify any proposed modification or rectification (collectively referred to as a "modification") to its Schedule  to Annex 16A  in writing  to 
the other Party .  
 3. The notification of proposed modification shall contain:   
(a) for any proposed withdrawal of an entity from its Schedule to Annex 16A in exercise of its rights on the grounds that government control 
or influence over the procuring entity's covered procurement has been effectively eliminated, evidence of that eliminat ion; or   
 
(b) for any other proposed modification, information as to the likely consequences of the change for the coverage provided for in this Chapter; and 
 (c) a proposal for any necessary compensatory adjustments pursuant to paragraph 4.  
 Compensatory Adjustments  
 
4. Subject to para graphs 5 and 6, a Party shall provide appropriate 
compensatory adjustments for a change in coverage, if necessary, to maintain a level of coverage comparable to  the coverage that existed  prior to the 
modification . 
 5. The Parties may agree another form of resolution as an alternative to 
compensatory adjustments. 
 6. A Party is not required to  provide compensatory adjustments to the other 
Party if  the proposed modification: 
 
(a) covers a procuring entity over which the Party has effectively 
eliminated its control or influence in respect of covered procurement by that procuring entity ; or 
 (b) is minor or of a purely formal nature, including a rectification  as 
described in paragraph 7. 
 Rectifications  
 7. The following modifications to a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  shall be 
considered a rectification, provided that they do not affect the  coverage 
provided for in this Chapter:  
 
(a) a change in the name of a procuring entity; 
 
(b) a merger of two or more procuring entities listed within a Section  of 
a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A; 
 
(c) the separation of a procuring entity listed in a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  into two or more procuring entities that are added to the 
procuring e ntities listed in the same Section of the Annex ; and 
 (d) changes in website references. 
  Objection to Notification  
 8. If the other Party disputes that:  
 
(a) a compensatory adjustment proposed under sub- paragraph 3( c) is 
adequate to maintain  a level of coverage comparable to the coverage 
that existed prior to the modification ; 
 
(b) the proposed modification covers a procuring entity over which the Party has effectively eliminated its control or influenc e; or  
 (c) the proposed modification is a change provided for in paragraph 6(b) , 
 
it shall notify the modifying Party of its objection in writing within 45 days 
of receipt of the notification of proposed modification referred to in 
paragraphs 2 and 3 or shall be deemed to have agreed to the proposed 
modification.  
 9. Where a Party submits an objection pursuant to paragraph 8, it shall set out , 
as may apply , the reasons why it believes: 
 
(a) the modification  is not a change provided for in subparagraphs 6(a) 
or 6(b)  and describe the effect of the proposed modification on the 
coverage provided for in the Chapter; and 
 (b) a compensatory adjustment proposed under subparagraph 3(c) is not adequate to maintain a level of coverage comparable to t he 
coverage that existed  prior to the modification . 
 Implementation of Modifications  10. The Joint Committee shall adopt a modification to the Schedule to Annex 
16A in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.2 (Functions of the 
Joint Committee – Administrative and Institutional Provisions) to reflect any 
agreed modification . 
  
Article 16.21  
Facilitation of Participation by SMEs  
 
1. The Parties recognise the important contribution that SMEs can make to 
economic growth and employment and the importance of facilitating the participation of SMEs in government procurement. 
 2. If a Party maintains a measure that provides preferential treatment for SMEs, 
the Party shall ensure that the measure, including the criteria for eligibility, 
is transparen t. 
 3. To facilitate participation by SMEs in covered procurement, each Party shall, to the extent possible and if appropriate:   
 
(a) provide comprehensive procurement -related information  that 
includes a definition of SMEs  in a single electronic portal;   
 (b) make all tender documentation available free of charge;   
 
(c) conduct procurement by electronic means or through other new 
information and communication technologies;  
  
(d) consider the size, design, and structure of the procurement , including 
the use of subcontracting by SMEs; 
 (e) seek opportunities to simplify administrative processes;  and 
 
(f) require prompt payment by procuring entities , and that procuring 
entities encourage its use in subcontracting. 
 
 
Article 16.22  
Cooperation 
 
1. The Parties recognise their shared interest in cooperating to promote 
international liberalisation of government procurement markets with a view to achieving enhanced understanding of their respective government 
procurement systems and to improving access to their respective markets.  
 
2. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in matters such as:  
 
(a)
 facilitating participation by suppliers in government procurement, in 
particular, with respect to SMEs ; 
 (b) exchanging experiences and information, such as regulatory frameworks and best practices, including on t he use and adoption of 
measures to promote environmental, social and labour considerations  
in government procurement; 
 (c)
 exchanging government procurement statistics and data; 
 (d) developing and expanding the use of electronic means in government procurement systems;  
 (e) institutional strengthening for the fulfilment of the provisions of this Chapter; 
 (f) encouraging greater  participation by women in government 
procurement to the extent possible; and  
 
(g) exchanging information relating to government procurement opportunities in each Party .  CHAPTER  17 
COMPETITION POLICY AND CONSUMER PROTECTION  
 
 
Article 17.1 
Competition Law and Authorities  
1. Each Party shall maintain national competition  laws in their respective 
territories which:   
(a) proscribe anti -competitive agreements;  
(b) proscribe anti -competitive practices by entities that have substantial 
market power; and 
(c) address mergers with substantial anti -competitive effects.  
2. Each Party shall apply its national competition laws to all commercial 
activities in its territory  regardless of nationality or governmental ownership.  
This does not preclude a Party from applying its national competition laws to commercial activities outside its borders that may have anti -competitive 
effects with in its jurisdiction.  
3. Each Party may provide for certain exemptions from the application of its national competition laws, provided that those exemptions are  transparent 
and are based on public policy grounds.   
4. Each Party shall maintain  an operationally independent national competition 
authority responsible for the enforcement of its national competition laws.   
5. Each Party shall enforce its national competition laws in a manner  that does 
not discriminate on the basis of nationality or governmental ownership . 
  
Article 17.2 
Procedural Fairness in Competition Law Enforcement  
1. Each Party shall ensure that before it imposes a sanction or remedy against a person pursuant to its national competition law, it affords that person: 
(a) information about the national competition authority’s competition concerns; 
(b) a reasonable opportunity to be legally represented; and   
(c) a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence in its defence, except that a Party may provide for the person to be heard  and present evidence within a reasonable time after it imposes an 
interim sanction or remedy .   
2. Each Party shall maintain w ritten procedures pursuant to which its national 
competition law investigations are conducted.  If these investigations are not subject to definitive deadlines, each Party’s national competition authorities shall endeavour to conduct their investigations w ithin a reasonable time 
frame .   
3. Each Party shall maintain rules of procedure and evidence that apply to proceedings conducted pursuant to its national competition law and to the determination of sanctions and remedies thereunder.  
4. Each Party shall provide a person that is subject to the imposition of a sanction or remedy pursuant to that Party’s national competition law with the opportunity to seek review of the sanction or remedy in a court or other independent tribunal established under that Party’s law .   
5. Each Party may authorise its national competition authorities to resolve civil or administrative matters voluntarily by consent of the authority and the person subject to the enforcement action .  A Party may provide for such 
voluntary resolution to be subject to review by a court or independent tribunal or a public comment period before becoming final.   
6. If a Party’s national competition authority issues a public notice that reveals the existence of a pending or ongoing investigation, that authority shall  not 
state and shall avoid imply ing in that notice that the person referred to in that 
notice has engaged in the alleged conduct or violated the Party’s national competition law.
1  
7. Each Party shall provide for the protection of business confidential inform ation, and other information treated as confidential under its law, 
obtained by its national competition authorities during the investigative process.  If a Party’s national competition authority uses or intends to use that information in a proceeding, the  Party shall, if it is permissible under its law 
and as appropriate, provide a procedure to allow the person under investigation timely access to information that is necessary to prepare an adequate response .   
8. Each Party shall ensure that its national com petition authorities afford a 
person under investigation conducted pursuant to the national competition law of that Party reasonable opportunity to consult with those national competition authorities with respect to significant legal, factual or procedural  
issues that arise during the investigation .   
   
                                                            
1 For the UK, this does not preclude the issuing of provisional, reasoned objections by a national 
competition authority .  Article 17.3 
Private Rights of Action  
1. For the purposes of this article “private right of action” means the right of a 
person to seek redress, including injunctive, monetary or other remedies, 
from a court or other independent tribunal for injury to that person’s business 
or property caused by a violation of national competition law. 
2. Recognising that a private right of action is an important supplement to the public enforcement of national competition law, each Party shall maintain 
measures that provide a private right of action, both independently and following a finding of violation by a national competition authority. 
3. Each Party shall ensure that a right provided pursuant to paragraph 2 is available to persons of the other Party on terms that are no less favourable than those available to its own persons. 
4. A Party may establish reasonable criteria for the exercise of any rights it creates or maintains in accordance w ith this Article.  
  
Article 17.4 
Transparency  
 
1.   The Parties recognise the value of making their competition enforcement policies as transparent as possible.  
 2.   On request of a Party, the other Party shall make available to the requesting Party public information concerning:   
 
(a)  its national competition law enforcement policies and practices; and  
 (b)  exemptions and immunities to its national competition laws. 
 
3.   Each Party shall ensure that  a final decision pursuant to its national 
competition  law is made in writing  and sets out, in non- criminal matters, 
findings of fact and the reasoning, including legal and, if applicable, 
economic analysis, on which the decision is based.  
 4.   Each Party shall further ensure that a final decision  referred to in paragraph 3 
and any order implementing that decision  are published, or if publication is 
not practicable, are otherwise made available to the public.  Each Party shall ensure that the version of the decision or order that  is made available to the 
public does not include confidential information that is protected from public disclosure by its law.  Article 17.5  
Consumer Protection  
1. The Parties recognise the importance of consumer protection policy and 
enforcement to enhancing consumer welfar e in the territories of the Parties .   
2. Each Party shall maintain consumer protection laws and regulations that proscribe: 
(a) misleading, deceptive and fraudulent commercial practices; and  
(b) unconscionable conduct or unfair commercial practices,  
that cause harm, or potential harm, to consumers.   
3. Each Party shall maintain laws and regulations  that provide  consumers with 
statutory rights  in relation to goods and services supplied to them, which at a 
minimum allow for remedies when: 
(a)  goods are of unaccepta ble quality or are defective;  
(b) goods are not as described; 
(c) goods are not fit for their represented purpose; and 
(d) services are not performed with appropriate care or skill.  
4. The Parties further recognise the importance of improving awareness of and 
providing access to consumer redress mechanisms, including for consumers of a Party transacting with suppliers of the other Party. 
5. The Parties recognise the benefits of dispute resolution mechanisms in facilitating the resolution of disputes between consu mers and suppliers, 
including alternative dispute resolution mechanisms. 
 
 
Article 17.6 
Cooperation on Competition Policy  and Consumer Protection  
1. The Parties  recognise the importance of cooperation and coordination 
between their respective competition and consumer protection authorities to foster effective competition and consumer protection law enforcement in the territories of the Parties.  To this end, the Parties may cooperate, through their competition and consumer protection authorities, on issues rel ating to the 
enforcement of competition and consumer protection law.  Such cooperation may include: 
(a) notification by a Party to the other Party of its activities relating to 
enforcement of competition and consumer protection law that it  considers may substantially affect the important interests of the other 
Party, as promptly as reasonably possible; 
(b) exchange of information, including confidential information, between 
the Parties to foster understanding or to facilitate effective enforcement of competition and consumer protection law; and 
(c) coordination of investigations that raise the same or related concerns relating to the enforcement of competition and consumer protection law. 
2. The Parties recognise that it is in their common interest to work together on technical cooperation activities to strengthen competition and consumer 
protection policy development and the enforcement of competition and consumer protection law.  Technical cooperation activities may include: 
(a) the exchange of information on the development and implementation 
of competition and consumer protection policy and law;  
(b) the sharing of studies, reviews and research relating to competition and consumer protection law and policy; and 
(c) the exchange of officials of policy agencies or competition and consumer protection authorities to deepen cooperation and knowledge 
sharing. 
3. The Parties acknowledge the importance of cooperation and coordination internationally and the work of multilateral organisations in this area, including the Competition and Consumer Policy committees of the 
Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development, the International 
Competition Network and the International Consumer Protection and Enforcement Network.   
4. Any cooperation and coordination under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be undertaken only to the extent that it is compatible with each Party’s law and important interests and within the Parties’ available resources.  
5. To implement the objectives of this Article, the Parties may enter into  
separate commitments or arrangements on cooperation and coordination which may provide for, among other things, enhanced information sharing including confidential information, and mutual assistance in competition and 
consumer law enforcement.  
  
Article 17.7  
Consultation  
To foster understanding between the Parties, or to address specific 
matters that arise under this Chapter, a Party shall, on request of the other 
Party, enter into consultations with the requesting Party .  In its request, the  requesting P arty shall indicate, if relevant, how the matter affects trade or 
investment between the Parties.   The Party addressed shall promptly 
acknowledge any such request and accord full and sympathetic consideration 
to the concerns of the requesting Party. 
 
 
Article 17.8  
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
Neither  Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter  
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  CHAPTER  18 
 
STATE- OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES  
 
 
Article 18.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“Arrangement” means the Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits, developed within the framework of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (“OECD”)  and adopted by its Council on 30 
June 2021, or a successor undertaking, whether developed within or outside 
of the OECD framework, that has been adopted by at least 12 original WTO Members that were Participants to the Arrangement as of January 1, 1979;  
 “commercial activities” means activities which an enterprise undertakes with an orientation toward profit-making,
1 and which result in the production of a 
good or supply of a service that will be sold to a consumer in the relevant market in quantities and at prices determined by the enterprise;
2 
 “commercial considerations” means price, quality, availability, 
marketability, transportation, and other terms and conditions of purchase or sale, or other factors that would normally be taken into account in the commercial decisions of a privately owned ente rprise in the relevant business 
or industry;  “designate” means to establish, designate or authorise a monopoly, or to expand the scope of a monopoly to cover an additional good or service;  “designated monopoly” means a privately owned monopoly that is designated after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and any government monopoly that a Party designates or has designated;  “government monopoly” means a monopoly that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party or by another government monopoly;  
 “independent pension fund” means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party that: 
 
(a) is engaged exclusively in the following ac tivities: 
 
                                                      
1 For greater certainty, activities undertaken by an enterprise which operates on a not -for-profit basis 
or on a cost -recovery basis are not activities undertaken with an orientation toward profit -making.  
2 For greater certainty, measures of general application to the relevant market shall not be construed 
as the determination by a Party of pricing, production, or supply decisions of an enterprise.  (i)  administering or providing a plan for pension, retirement, 
social security,  disability,  death  or employee benefits, or any 
combination thereof , solely for the benefit of natural persons 
who are contributors to such a plan and their benefici aries; or  
 
(ii) investing the assets of these plans;  
 
(b) has a fiduciary duty to the natural persons referred to in subparagraph (a)(i); and  
 (c) is free from investment direction from the government of the Party;
3 
 
“market” means the geographical and commercial market for a good or service;  
 “monopoly” means an entity, including a consortium or government agency, that in any relevant market in the territory of a Party is designated as the sole provider or purchaser of a good or service, but does not include an entity that has been granted an exclusive intellectual property right solely by reason of the grant;  
 “non- commercial assistance”
4 means assistance to a state- owned enterprise 
by virtue of that state -owned enterprise’s government ownership or control, 
where:  
 
(a) “assistance” means:  
 
(i) direct transfers of funds or potential direct transfers of funds or liabilities, such as:  
 (A)  grants or debt forgiveness;  (B) loans, loan guarantees , or other types of financing on 
terms more favourable than those commercially available to that enterprise;  or 
 
                                                      
3 Investment direction from the government of a Party: (a) does not include general guidance with 
respect to ri sk management and asset allocation that is not inconsistent with usual investment 
practices; and (b) is not demonstrated, alone, by the presence of government officials on the 
enterprise’s board of directors or investment panel.  
4 For greater certainty, no n-commercial assistance does not include: (a) intra -group transactions 
within a corporate group including state -owned enterprises, for example, between the parent and 
subsidiaries of the group, or among the group’s subsidiaries, when normal business practi ces require 
reporting the financial position of the group excluding these intra -group transactions; (b) other 
transactions between state -owned enterprises that are consistent with the usual practices of privately 
owned enterprises in arm’s length transacti ons; or (c) a Party's transfer of funds, collected from 
contributors to a plan for pension, retirement, social security, disability, death or employee benefits, 
or any combination thereof, to an independent pension fund for investment on behalf of the 
contributors and their beneficiaries.  (C) equity capital inconsistent with the usual investment 
practice, including for the provision of risk capital, of private investors; or  
 
(ii) goods or services other than general infrastructure on terms more favourable than those commercially available to that enterprise;  
 
(b) “by virtue of that state -owned enterprise’s government ownership or 
control”5 means that the Party or any of the Party’s  state enterprises 
or state -owned enterprises: 
 
(i) explicitly limits access to the assistance to the Party’s state -
owned enterprises; 
 (ii) provides assistance which is predominately used by the Party’s state -owned enterprises; 
 (iii) provides a dispropor tionately large amount of the assistance to 
the Party’s state -owned enterprises; or  
 (iv) otherwise favours the Party’s state -owned enterprises through 
the use of its discretion in the provision of assistance; 
 
“public service mandate” means a government m andate pursuant to which a 
state- owned enterprise makes available a service, directly or indirectly, to the 
general public in its territory;
6 
 “sovereign wealth fund” means an enterprise owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party that: 
 
(a) serves solely as a special purpose investment fund or arrangement
7 
for asset management, investment, and related activities, using financial assets of a Party; and  
 
(b) is a Member of the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds or endorses the Ge nerally Accepted Principles and Practices  
(“Santiago Principles”) issued by the International Working Group of Sovereign Wealth Funds, October 2008, or such other principles and practices as may be agreed to by the Parties,  
 
                                                      
5 In determining whether the assistance is provided “by virtue of that state -owned enterprise’s 
government ownership or control”, account  shall be taken of the extent of diversification of economic 
activities within the te rritory of the Party, as well as of the length of time during which the non-
commercial assistance programme has been in operation.  
6 For greater certainty, a service to the general public includes : (a) the distribution of goods ; and (b) 
the supply of general infrastructure services.  
7 For greater certainty, the Parties understand that the word “arrangement” as an alternative to “fund” 
allows for a flexible interpretation of the legal arrangement through which the assets can be invested.  and includes any special purpos e vehicles established solely for such 
activities described in subparagraph (a) wholly owned by the enterprise, or 
wholly owned by the Party but managed by the enterprise; and  “state- owned enterprise” means an enterprise that is principally engaged in 
commercial activities in which a Party:  
 
(a) directly owns more than 50 per cent of the share capital;  
 (b) controls, through ownership interests, the exercise of more than 50 per cent of the voting rights; or 
 (c) holds the power to appoint a majority of members of the board of directors or any other equ ivalent management body.   
  
Article 18.2 
Scope
8 
 1. This Chapter applies with respect to the activities of state -owned enterprises 
and designated monopolies of a Party that affect trade or investment between the Parties.
9 
 2. Nothing in this Chapter  shall prevent  a central bank or monetary authority of 
a Party from performing regulatory or supervisory activities or conducting monetary and related credit policy and exchange rate policy. 
 3. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent  a financial regulatory body of a Party, 
including a non-governmental body, such as a securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or association, from exercising regulatory or supervisory authority over  financial services 
suppliers. 
 4. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent  a Party, or one of its state enterprises or 
state- owned enterprises from undertaking activities for the purpose of the 
resolution of a failing or failed established financial service supplier or any 
other failing or failed enterprise principally engaged in the supply of financial 
services.  
 5. This Chapter does not apply with respect to a sovereign wealth fund of a Party, except: 
 
                                                      
8 For the purpo ses of this Chapter, the terms “financial service supplier”, “established financial service 
supplier” and “financial services ” have  the same meaning as in Article 9.1 (Definitions – Financial 
Services).  
9 This Chapter also applies with respect to the activities of state -owned enterprises of a Party that 
cause adverse effects in the market of a non -party as provided in Article 18.7 (Adverse Effects).  (a) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article  18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance) 
apply with respect to a Party’s indirect provision of non- commercial 
assistance through a sovereign wealth fund; and 
 
(b) Paragraph 2 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance) applies 
with respect to a sovereign wealth fund’s provision of non-
commercial assistance.  
 6. This Chapter does not apply with respect to:  
(a) an independent pension fund of a Party; or 
 
(b) an enterprise owned or controlled by an independent pension fund of a Party, except:  
 
(i) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance) apply with respect to a Party’s direct or indirect 
provision of non- commercial assistance to an enterprise 
owned or controlled by an independent pension fund; and 
 
(ii) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 18.6 (Non- commercial 
Assistan ce) apply with respect to a Party’s indirect provision 
of non- commercial assistance  through an enterprise owned or 
controlled by an independent pension fund. 
 7. This Chapter does not apply to: 
 
(a) government procurement; or  
(b) audio- visual services.  
 
8. Subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b) of Article 18.4 ( Non-discriminatory Treatment 
and Commercial Considerations ) do not apply where a state -owned enterprise 
accords more favourable treatment to Indigenous persons10 and organisations 
in the purchase of goods and services.  
 
9. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a state- owned enterprise of a Party from 
providing goods or services exclusively to that Party for the purposes of carrying out that Party’s governmental functions. 
 10. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from:  
 
(a) establishing or maintaining a state enterprise or a state -owned 
enterprise; or 
 (b) designating a monopoly.  
                                                      
10 For the purposes of this reservation, an Indigenous person means a person of the Aboriginal and 
Torres Stra it Islander peoples.   
11. Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations), Article 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) and Article 
18.10 (Transparency) do not apply to any service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority.
11 
 12. Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c) , 2(b) and 2(c)  of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations) do not  apply to the extent that a 
Party’s state -owned enterprise or designated monopoly makes purchases and 
sales of goods or services pursuant to:  
 
(a) any existing non- conforming measure that the Party maintains, 
continues, renews or amends in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 13.13 (Non -Conforming Measures - Investment), paragraph 1 
of Article 8.7 (Non- Conforming Measures – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services) or paragraph 1(a) to (c) of Article 9.10 (Non-Conforming 
Measures – Financial Services), as set out in its Schedule to Annex I 
(Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment) or in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III  (Schedules 
of Non-Conforming Measures for Financial Se rvices) ; or 
 
(b) any non- conforming measure that the Party adopts or maintains with 
respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article  13.13 (Non -Conforming Measures – 
Investment), paragraph 2 of Article 8.7 (Non -Confor ming Measures 
– Cross -Border Trade in Services) or paragraph 1(d) of Article 9.10 
(Non -Conforming Measures – Financial Services), as set out in its 
Schedule to Annex II (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for 
Services and Investment) or in Section B of its Schedule to Annex III  
(Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Financial Services) .   
 
 
Article 18.3 
Delegated Authority  
 
Each Party shall ensure that , when its state- owned enterprises, state 
enterprises and designated monopolies exercise any regulatory, 
administrative or other governmental authority that the Party has directed or delegated to such entities to carry out, those entities act in a manner th at is 
not inconsistent with that Party’s obligations under this Agreement.
12   
  
                                                      
11 For the purposes of this paragraph, “a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” 
has the same meaning as in GATS, including the meaning in the Financial Services Annex where applicable.  
12 Examples of regulatory, adm inistrative , or other governmental authority include the power to 
expropriate, grant licences, approve commercial transactions, or impose quotas, fees or other charges.  Article 18.4 
Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations  
 
1. Each Party shall ensure that each of its state- owned enterprises, when 
engaging in commercial activities:  
 
(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale of a good or service, except to fulfil any terms of its public service mandate that are not inconsistent with subparagraph (c)(ii);  
 (b) in its purchase of a good or service:  
 
(i) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of the other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party or of any non- party; and  
 
(ii) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a 
covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investmen ts of investors of the Party or of any 
non-party; and  
 
(c) in its sale of a good or service: 
 
(i) accords to an enterprise of the other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party  or of any 
non-party; and  
 (ii) accords to  an enterprise that is a covered investment in the 
Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party or of any non-party.
13 
 2. Each Party shall ensure that each of its designated monopolies: 
 
(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale of the monopoly good or service in the relevant market, except to fulfil any terms of its designation that are not inconsistent with subparagraph (b), (c) or (d); 
 
(b) in its purchase of the monopoly good or service: 
 
                                                      
13 Paragraph 1 of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Consideratio ns) shall 
not apply with respect to the purchase or sale of shares, stock or other forms of equity by a state-
owned enterprise as a means of its equity participation in another enterprise.  (i) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of the 
other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party  
or of any non- party; and  
 (ii) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party  or of any 
non-party; and  
 
(c)  in its sale of the monopoly good or service: 
 
(i) accords to an enterprise of the other Party treatment no  less 
favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party  or of any 
non-party; and  
 (ii) accords to an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises in the relevant market in  the Party’s territory that 
are investments of investors of the Party  or of any non- party; 
and 
 
(d) does not use its monopoly position to engage in, either directly or indirectly, including through its dealings with its parent, subsidiaries , 
or other entit ies the Party or the designated monopoly owns, 
anticompetitive practices in a non- monopolised market in its territory 
that negatively affect trade or investment between the Parties.
14 
 3. Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) and 2(c)  do not preclude a state -owned 
enterprise or designated monopoly from: 
 
(a) purchasing or selling goods or services on different terms or conditions including those relating to price; or 
 (b) refusing to purchase or sell goods or services,  
 provided that such differential treatment or refusal is undertaken in 
accordance with commercial considerations.  
  
                                                      
14 For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the requirements of this subparagraph through the 
enforcement or implementation of its generally applicable national competition laws and 
regulations, its economic regulatory laws and regulations, or other ap propriate measures.  Article 18.5 
Courts and Administrative  Bodies  
 
1. Each Party shall provide its courts with jurisdiction over civil claims against an enterprise owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign government based on a commercial activity carried on in its territory.
15  This 
shall not  be construed to require a Party to provide jurisdiction over such 
claims if it does not provide jurisdiction over similar claims against enterprises that are not owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign government. 
 2. Each Party shall ensure that any administrative body that the Party establishes or maintains that regulates a state- owned enterprise exercises its regulatory 
discretion in an impartial manner with respect to enterprises that it regulates, 
including enterprises that are not state- owned enterprises.
16 
  
Article 18.6 
Non-commercial Assistance  
 1. Neither Party shall cause
17 adverse  effects to the interests of the other Party 
through the use of non- commercial assistance that it provides, either directly 
or indirectly ,18 to any of its state- owned enterprises with respect to:  
 
(a) the production and sale of a good by the state-owned ent erprise;  
 (b) the supply of a service by the state- owned enterprise from the territory 
of the Party into the territory of the other Party; or 
 (c) the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party through an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the other Party.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that its state enterprises and state -owned enterprises 
do not cause adverse effects to the interests of the other Party through the use of non- commercial assistance that the state enterprise or state -owned 
enterprise provides to any of its state -owned enterprises with respect to:  
 
                                                      
15 This paragrap h shall not be construed to preclude a Party from providing its courts with jurisdiction 
over claims against enterprises owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign government other than those claims referred to in this paragraph.  
16 For greater certainty, the impartiality with which an administrative body exercises its regulatory 
discretion is to be assessed by reference to a pattern or practice of that administrative body.  
17 For the purposes of paragr aphs 1 and 2, it must be demonstrated that the adverse effects claimed 
have been caused by the non -commercial assistance.  Thus, the non- commercial assistance must be 
examined within the context of other possible causal factors to ensure an appropriate att ribution of 
causality.  
18 For greater certainty, indirect provision includes the situation in which a Party entrusts or directs 
an enterprise that is not a state -owned enterprise to provide non -commercial assistance.  (a) the production and sale of a good by the state-owned enterprise; 
 
(b) the supply of a service by the state- owned enterprise from the territory 
of the Party into the territory of the other Party; or 
 (c) the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party through an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the other Party.  
 3. Neither Party shall cause injury to a domestic indu stry
19 of the other Party 
through the use of non- commercial assistance that it provides, either directly 
or indirectly, to any of its state -owned enterprises that is a covered investment 
in the territory of the other Party in circumstances where:  
 (a) the non- commercial assistance is provided with respect to the 
production and sale of a good by the state -owned enterprise in the 
territory of the other Party; and  
 (b) a like good is produced and sold in the territory of the other Party by the domestic industry of the other Party.
20 
 4. A service supplied by a state- owned enterprise of a Party within the Party’s 
territory shall be  deemed not to cause adverse effects.
21   
  
Article 18.7 
Adverse Effects  
 1. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), adverse effects arise if the effect of the non -commercial 
assistance is:  
 
(a) that the production and sale of a good by a Party’s state -owned 
enterprise that has received the non -commercial assistance displaces 
or impedes from the Party’s market imports of a like good of the other Party or sales of a like good produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the Party; 
 
                                                      
19 The term “domestic industry” refers to  the domestic producers as a whole of the like good, or to 
those domestic producers whose collective output of the like good constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of the like good, excluding the state -owned enterprise that is a co vered 
investment that has received the non -commercial assistance referred to in this paragraph.  
20 In situations of material retardation of the establishment of a domestic industry, it is understood 
that a domestic industry may not yet produce and sell the like good. However, in these situations, 
there must be evidence that a prospective domestic producer has made a substantial commitment to 
commence production and sales of the like good.  
21 For greater certainty, this paragraph  shall not be construed to appl y to a service that itself is a 
form of non -commercial assistance.  (b) that the production and sale of a good by a Party’s state -owned 
enterprise that has received the non- commercial assistance displaces 
or impedes from: 
 
(i) the market of the other Party sales of a like good produced by 
an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of 
that other Party; or  
 (ii) the market of a non- party imports of a like good of the other 
Party;  
 (c) a significant price undercutting by a good produced by a Party’s state -
owned enterprise that has received the non- commercial assistance and 
sold by the enterprise in:  
 
(i) the market of a Party as compared with the price in the same 
market of imports of a like good of the other Party or a like good that is produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the Party, or significant price suppression, price depression, or lost sales in the sam e market; 
or 
 (ii) the market of a non- party as compared with the price in the 
same market of imports of a like good of the other Party, or significant price suppression, price depression , or lost sales in 
the same market;  
 (d) that services supplied by a Party's state -owned enterprise that has 
received the non- commercial assistance displace or impede from the 
market of the other Party a like service supplied by a service supplier of the other Party; or  
 (e) a significant price undercutting by a service supplied in the market of the other Party by a Party’s state -owned enterprise that has received 
the non- commercial assistance as compared with the price in the same 
market of a like service supplied by a service supplier of the other Party, or significant pri ce suppression, price depression , or lost sales 
in the same market.
22 
 2. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1(a), 1(b) and 1(d), the displacing or 
impeding of a good or service includes any case in which it has been demonstrated that there has been a signif icant change in relative shares of the 
market to the disadvantage of the like good or like service.  “Significant 
change in relative shares of the market ” shall include any of the following 
                                                      
22 The purchase or sale of shares, stock or other forms of equity by a state -owned enterprise that has 
received non -commercial assistance as a means of its equity participation in another en terprise shall 
not be construed to give rise to adverse effects as provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 18.7 (Adverse  
Effects).  situations:  
 
(a) there is a significant increase in the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state-owned enterprise; 
 (b) the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state -owned 
enterprise remains constant in circumstances in which, in the absence of the non- commercial assistance, it would have d eclined 
significantly; or  
 (c) the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state -owned 
enterprise declines, but at a significantly slower rate than would have been the case in the absence of the non -commercial assistance.  
 
The change must manifest itself over an appropriately representative period sufficient to demonstrate clear trends in the development of the market for the good or service concerned, which, in normal circumstances, shall be at 
least one year.  
 
3. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1(c) and 1(e), price undercutting shall 
include  any case in which such price undercutting has been demonstrated 
through a comparison of the prices of the good or service of the state -owned 
enterprise with the prices of the like good or service.  
 
4. Comparisons of the prices in paragraph 3 shall be  made at the same level of 
trade and at comparable times, and due account shall be taken for factors 
affecting price comparability.  If a direct comparison of transactions is not 
possible, the existence of price undercutting may be demonstrated on some other reasonable basis, such as, in the case of goods, a comparison of unit values.  
 
5. Non-commercial assistance that a Party provides:  
 
(a) before the signing of this Agreement; or 
 (b) within three years  of signing of this Agreement, pursuant to a law that 
is enacted, or contractual obligation undertaken, prior to the signing of this Agreement, 
 shall be deemed not to cause adverse effects.  
 6. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1(b) and 2(b) of Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance), the initial capitalisation of a state -owned  enterprise, 
or the acquisition by a Party of a controlling interest in an enterprise, that is principally engaged in the supply of services within the territory of the Party, shall be deemed not to cause adverse effects.  Article 18.8 
Injury  
 
1. For the purposes of paragraph 3 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), the term “injury” means material injury to a domestic industry, 
threat of material injury to a domestic industry , or material retardation of the 
establishment of such an industry.  A determination of material injury shall 
be based on positive evidence and involve an objective examination of the relevant factors, including the volume of production by the covered investment that has received non- commercial assistance, the effect of such 
production on prices for like goods produced and sold by the domestic industry, and the effect of such production on the domestic industry producing like goods.
23 
 2. With regard to the volume of production by the covered investment that has received non- commercial assistance, considerati on shall  be given as to 
whether there has been a significant increase in the volume of production, either in absolute terms or relative to production or consumption in the territory of the Party in which injury is alleged to have occurred.  With regard 
to the effect of the production by the covered investment on prices, consideration  shall be given as to whether there has been a significant price 
undercutt ing by the goods produced and sold by the covered investment as 
compared with the price of like goods produced and sold by the domestic industry, or whether the effect of production by the covered investment is otherwise to depress prices to a significant degree or to prevent price increases, which otherwise would have occurred, to a significant degree.  No 
one or several of these factors can necessarily give decisive guidance.  
 3. The examination of the impact on the domestic industry of the goods produced and sold by the covered investment that received the non-
commercial assistance shall include an evaluation of all relevant economic 
factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the industry, such as actual and potential decline in output, sales, market share, profits, productivity, return on investments, or utilisation of capacity; factors affecting domestic prices; actual and potential negative effects on cash flow, inventories, employment, wages, growth, ability to raise capital or investments , and, in 
the case of agriculture, whether there has been an increased burden on government support programmes.  This list is not exhaustive, nor can one or 
several of these factors necessarily give decisive guidance.  
 4. It must be demonstrated that the goods produced and sold by the covered investment are, through the effects
24 of the non- commercial assistance, 
causing injury within the meaning of this Article.  The demonstration of a 
causal relationship between the goods produced and sold by the covered 
                                                      
23 The periods for examination of the non -commercial assistance and injury shall be reasonably 
established and  shall end as clo sely as practical to the date of initiation of the proceeding before the 
panel.  
24 As set out in paragraphs 2 and 3.  investment and the injury to the domestic industry shall be based on an 
examination of all relevant evidence.  Any known factors other than the 
goods produced by the covered investment which at the same time are 
injuring the domestic industry  shall be examined , and the injuries caused by 
these other factors must not be attributed to the goods produced and sold by the covered investment that has received non -commercial assistance.   Factors 
which may be relevant in this respect include, among other things, the volumes and prices of other like goods in the market in question, contraction in demand or changes in the patterns of consumption, and developments in technology and the export performance and productivity of the domestic industry. 
 5. A determination of a t hreat of material injury shall be based on facts and not 
merely on allegation, conjecture , or remote possibility and shall  be 
considered with special care.  The change in circumstances which would 
create a situation in which non-c ommercial assistance to the covered 
investment would cause injury must be clearly foreseen and imminent.  In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, there should be consideration of relevant factors
25 and of whether the totality 
of the factors considered lead to the conclusion that further availability of goods produced by the covered investment is imminent and that, unless protective action is taken, material injury would occur.   
 
 
Article 18.9 
Application to Sub Central State -Owned Enterprises and Designated 
Monopolies 
 
Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations), Article 18.5 (Courts and Administrative Bodies), Article 
18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) and Article 18.10 (Transparency)  shall  
not apply with respect to a Party’s state -owned enterprises or designated 
monopolies as set out in Annex 18- D (Application to Sub- Central State-
Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies).   
  
   
                                                      
25 In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, a panel pursuant 
to Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) should consider, among other things, such factors as: (a) the nature 
of the non -commercial assistance in question and the trade effects likely to arise therefrom; (b) a 
significant rate of increase in sales in the domestic market by t he covered investment, indicating a 
likelihood of substantially increased sales; (c) sufficient freely disposable, or an imminent, substantial increase in, capacity of the covered investment indicating the likelihood of substantially increased 
production of the good by that covered investment, taking into account the availability of export 
markets to absorb additional production; (d) whether prices of goods sold by the covered investment will have a significant depressing or suppressing effect on the price of like goods; and (e) inventories 
of like goods.  Article 18.10  
Transparency  
 
1. Each Party shall provide to the other Party or otherwise make publicly 
available on an official website a list of its state -owned enterprises no later 
than six months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and 
thereafter shall update the list annually.  
 2. E ach Party shall promptly notify the other Party or otherwise make publicly 
available on an official website the designation of a monopoly or expansion of the scope of an existing monopoly and the terms of its designation. 
 3. On the written request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide the following information concerning a state -owned enterprise or a government 
monopoly, provided that the request includes an explanation of how the activities of the entity may be affecting trade or investment b etween the 
Parties:  
 (a) the percentage of shares that the Party, its state -owned enterprises or 
designated monopolies cumulatively own, and the percentage of votes that they cumulatively hold, in the entity;  
 (b) a description of any special shares or special voting or other rights that the Party, its state -owned enterprises or designated monopolies 
hold, to the extent these rights are different than the rights attached to the general common shares of the entity; 
 (c) the government titles of any government official serving as an officer or member of the entity’s board of directors; 
 (d) the entity’s annual revenue and total assets over the most recent three -
year period for which information is available; 
 (e) any exemptions and immunities from which the entity benefits under the Party’s law; and  
 (f) any additional information regarding the entity that is publicly available, including annual financial reports and third- party audits, 
and that is sought in the written  request.  
 4. On the written request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide, in writing, information regarding any policy or programme it has adopted or maintains that provides for non- commercial assistance, provided that the 
request includes an explanation of how the policy or programme affects or could affect trade or investment between the Parties.  
 5. When a Party provides a response pursuant to paragraph 4, the information it provides shall be sufficiently specific to enable the requesting Party to  understand the operation of and evaluate the policy or programme and its 
effects or potential effects on trade or investment between the Parties.  The 
Party responding to a request shall ensure that the response it provides contains the following information: 
 (a) the form of the non- commercial assistance provided under the policy 
or programme, for example, grant or loan; 
 (b) the names of the government agencies, state- owned enterprises, or 
state enterprises providing the non- commercial assistance  and the 
names of the state- owned enterprises that have received or are eligible 
to receive the non- commercial assistance;  
 (c) the legal basis and policy objective of the policy or programme providing for the non- commercial assistance;  
 (d) with respect t o goods, the amount per unit of the non- commercial 
assistance or, in cases where this is not possible, the total amount or the annual amount budgeted for the non- commercial assistance, 
indicating, if possible, the average amount per unit in the previous year; 
 (e) with respect to services, the total amount or the annual amount budgeted for the non- commercial assistance, indicating, if possible, 
the total amount in the previous year; 
 (f) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non- commercial 
assistance in the form of loans or loan guarantees, the amount of the loan or amount of the loan guaranteed, interest rates, and fees charged;  
 (g) with respect to policies or programmes p roviding for non- commercial 
assistance in the form of the provision of goods or services, the prices charged, if any;  
 (h) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non- commercial 
assistance in the form of equity capital, the amount invested, the number and a description of the shares received, and any assessments that were conducted with respect to the underlying investment decision; 
 (i) the duration of the policy or programme or any other time -limits 
attached to it; and  
 (j) statistical data permitting an assessment of the effects of the non -
commercial assistance on trade or investment between the Parties.  
 6. If a Party considers that it has not adopted or does not maintain any policies or programmes referred to in paragraph 4, it shall so inform the requesting  Party in writing.  
 
7. If any relevant points in paragraph 5 have not been addressed in the written response, an explanation shall be provided in the written response itself. 
 8. The Parties recognise that the provision of information under paragraphs 5 and 7 does not prejudge the legal status of the assistance that was the subject of the request under paragraph 4 or the effects of that assistance under this Agreement.  
 9. When a Party provides written information pursuant to a request under this Article and informs the requesting Party that it considers the information to be confidential, the requesting Party shall not disclose the information without the prior consent of the Party providing the information.   
  
Article 18.11 
Cooperation 
 1. The Parties recognise the importance of the development of transparent, robust and effective international trade rules to ensure open and fair competition between state -owned and privately- owned enterprises in global 
trade.  The Parties also recognise t he importance of addressing trade -
distorting practices by state -owned enterprises, including the provision of 
non-commercial assistance that impairs the proper functioning of markets.  
The Parties further recognise the role of relevant international standa rds, 
including the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State -Owned 
Enterprises, adopted by the OECD Council  on 8 July 2015 in developing 
such rule s. 
 2. Accordingly, the Parties shall, where appropriate and subject to available resources, engage in mutually agreed technical cooperation activities, including: 
 
(a) cooperating in international fora that deal with regulation of state -
owned enterprises in global trade, including in particular the  WTO 
and the OECD;  
 (b) exchanging information regarding each Party’s e xperiences in 
improving the corporate governance and operation of their state -
owned enterprises; 
 (c) sharing best practices on policy approaches to ensure a level playing field between state -owned and privately owned enterprises, including 
policies related to competitive neutrality; and  (d) organising international seminars, workshops , or any other 
appropriate forum for sharing technical information and expertise 
related to the governance and operations of state-owned enterprises.   
  
Article 18.12 
Contact Points  
 
Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point on State -Owned 
Enterprises  and Designated Monopolies to facilitate communications 
between the Parties on any  matter covered by this Chapter.    
  
Article 18.13 
Exceptions  
 1. Nothing in Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations) or Article 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) shall be 
construed to:  
 
(a) prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party  of measures to 
respond temporarily to a national or global economic emergency; or 
 
(b) apply to a state -owned enterprise with respect to which a Party has 
adopted or enforced measures on a temporary basis in response to a national or global economic emergency, for the duration of that emergency.  
 2. Paragraph 1 of Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations) does not apply with respect to the supply of financial services 
by a state -owned enterprise pursuant to a government mandate if that supply 
of financial services:  
 
(a) supports exports or imports, provided that these services are: 
 (i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or 
 (ii) offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market;
26 
 
                                                      
26 In circumstances where no comparable financial services are offered in the commercial market: (a) 
for the  purposes of subparagraphs 2(a)(ii), 2(b)(ii), 3(a)(ii) and 3(b)(ii), the state -owned enterprise 
may rely as necessary on available evidence to establish a benchmark of the terms on which such 
services would be offered in the commercial market; and (b) for the purposes of subparagraphs 2(a)(i), 2(b)(i), 3(a)(i) and 3(b)(i), the supply of the financial services shall be deemed not to be intended to 
displace commercial financing.  (b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided 
that these services are:  
 (i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or  
 (ii) offered on terms no more favourable than those  that could be 
obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or  
 
(c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided that it falls within the scope of the Arrangement. 
 3. The supply of financial services by a state -owned enterprise pursuant to a 
government mandate shall be deemed not to give rise to adverse effects under 
subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) or 2(c) of Article 18.6 (Non- commercial 
Assistance) where the Party in which the financial  service is supplied requires 
a local presence in order to supply those services, if that supply of financial services:
27 
 (a) supports exports and imports, provided that these services are: 
 
(i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or 
 (ii) offer ed on terms no more favourable than those that could be 
obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market;  
 (b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided that these services are:  
 
(i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or  
 (ii) offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or  
 (c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided that it falls wi thin the scope of the Arrangement. 
 4. Article 18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance) does  not apply with respect to an 
enterprise located outside the territory of a Party over which a state- owned 
enterprise of that Party has assumed temporary ownership as a consequence of foreclosure or a similar action in connection with defaulted debt, or payment of an insurance claim by the state -owned enterprise, associated with 
                                                      
27 For the purposes of this paragraph, in cases where the Party in which the financial service is supplied 
requires a local presence in order to supply those services, the supply of the financial services identified in this paragraph through an enterprise that is a covered investment  shall be  deemed to not 
give rise to adverse effects.  the supply of the financial services referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, provided 
that any support the Party, a state enterprise or state- owned enterprise of the 
Party, provides to the enterprise during the period of temporary ownership is provided in order to rec oup the state -owned enterprise’s investment in 
accordance with a restructuring or liquidation plan that will result in the ultimate divestiture from the enterprise.  
 5. Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations), Article 18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance),  and Article 
18.10 (Transparency)  do not apply with respect to a state -owned enterprise 
or designated monopoly if in any one of the three previous consecutive fiscal years, the annual revenue derived from the commercial activities of the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly was less than a threshold amount which shall be calculated in accordance with Annex 18-A (Threshold 
Calculation) .
28   
  
Article 18.14 
Further Negotiations  
   Within five years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, 
the Parties shall conduct further negotiations on extending the application of the disciplines in this Chapter in accordance with Annex 18- C (Further 
Negotiations).   
  
Article 18.15 
Proc ess for Developing Information  
   Annex 18- B (Process for Developing Information Concerning State -
Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies) applies in any dispute under 
Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) regarding a Party’s conformity with  Article 
18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or 
Article 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) .   
                                                      
28 When a Party invokes this exception during consultations under Article 30.7 (Consultations – 
Dispute Settlement), the consulting Parties should exchange and discuss available evidence 
concerning the annual revenue of the state -owned enterprise or the designated monopoly derived from 
the commercial activities during the three previous consecutive fisc al years in an effort to resolve 
during the consultations period any disagreement regarding the application of this exception.  ANNEX 18-A 
THRESHOLD CALCULATION 
 
1. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the threshold referred to in paragraph 5 of Article 18.13 (Exceptions ) shall be 200 million Special 
Drawing Rights (SDRs).  
 2. The amount of the threshold shall  be adjusted at three- year intervals with each 
adjustment taking effect on 1 January.  The first adjustment shall take place 
on the first 1 January following the entry into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the formula set out in this Annex. 
 3. The threshold shall be adjusted for changes in general price levels using a 
composite SDR inflation rate, calculated as a weighted sum of cumulative per cent changes in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) deflators of SDR component currencies over the three -year period ending 30 June of the year 
prior to the adjustment taking effect, and using the following formula: 
 
𝑇𝑇1 = (1 + Σ w𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆  . Π𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆))𝑇𝑇0 
 
where:  
 
𝑇𝑇0 = threshold value at base period; 
𝑇𝑇1 = new (adjusted) threshold value; 
w𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆   = respective (fixed) weights of each currency, 𝑖𝑖 , in the SDR 
(as at  30 June of the year prior to adjustment taking effect); 
and 
Π𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆  = cumulative per cent change in the GDP deflator of  each 
currency, 𝑖𝑖, in the SDR over the three -year period ending 30 
June of the year prior to adjustment taking effect. 
 
4. Each Party shall convert the threshold into national currency terms where the conversion rates  shall be the average of monthly values of that Party’s 
national currency in SDR terms over the three -year period to 30 June of the 
year before the threshold is to take effect.  Each Party shall notify the other 
Party of its applicable threshold in their respective national currencies.  
 5. For the purposes of this Chapter, all data  shall be drawn from the International 
Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database.  
 6. The Parties shall consult if a major change in a national currency vis-à-vis the SDR were to create a significant problem with regard to the application of this Chapter.  ANNEX 18-B 
 
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING INFORMATION CONCERNING STATE-
OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES  
 
1. If a panel has been established pursuant to Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) 
to examine a complaint arising under Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance) , the Parties may exchange written questions and 
responses, as set forth in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, to obtain information relevant to the complaint that is not otherwise readily available.  
 2. A Party (questioning Party) may provide written questions to the other Party 
(answering Party) within 15 days of the date the panel  is established.  The 
answering Party shall provide its responses to the questions to the questioning Party within 30 days of the date it receives the questions.  
 3. The questioning Party may provide any follow -up written questions to the 
answering Party within 15 days of the date it receives the responses to the initial questions.  The answering Party shall provide its responses to the 
follow- up questions to the questioning Party within 30 days of the date it 
receives the follow -up questions. 
 4. If the questioning Party considers that the answering Party has failed to cooperate in the information- gathering process under this Annex, the 
questioning Party shall inform the panel and the answering Party in writing within 30 days of the date the responses to the questioning Party’s final questions are due, and provide the basis for its view.  The panel shall afford 
the answering Party an opportunity to reply in writing. 
 5. A Party that provides written questions or responses to the other Party pursuant to these procedures shall, on the same day, provide the questions or answers to the panel.  
 6. The answering Party may designate information in its responses as confidential information in accordance with the procedures set out in the 
Rules of Procedure established in accordance with subparagraph 1(e ) of 
Article  30.2 (Functions of the Joint Committee  – Administrative and 
Institutional Provisions ) or other rules of procedure agreed to by the Parties.  
 7. The time periods in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 may be modified upon agreement of the Parties or approval by the panel. 
 8. In determining whether a Party has failed to cooperate in the information-gathering process, the panel shall take into account the reasonableness of the 
questions and the efforts the answering Party has made to respond to the questions in a cooperative and timely manner.  9. I n making findings of fact and its initial report, the panel should draw adverse 
inferenc es from instances of non- cooperation by a Party in the information -
gathering process. 
 
10. The panel may deviate from the time period set out in Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) for the issuance of the initial report if necessary  to accommodate 
the information -gathering process. 
 11. The panel may seek additional information from a Party that was not provided to the panel through the information- gathering process where the panel 
considers the information necessary to resolve the d ispute.  However, the 
panel shall not request additional information to complete the record where the information would support a Party’s position and the absence of that information in the record is the result of that Party’s non -cooperation in the 
inform ation -gathering process.  ANNEX 18-C 
 
FURTHER NEGOTIATIONS  
 
  Within five years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, 
the Parties shall conduct further negotiations on extending the application of:  
 
(a) the disciplines in this Chapter to the activities of state-owned 
enterprises that are owned or controlled by a sub- central level of 
government, and designated monopolies designated by a sub- central 
level of government, where such activities have been listed in Annex 18-D (Application to Sub- Central State -Owned Enterprises and 
Designated Monopolies); and  
 (b) the disciplines in Articl e 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) and 
Article  18.7 (Adverse Effects) to address effects caused, in a market 
of a non-Party, by the supply of services by a state-owned enterprise.  ANNEX 18-D 
 
APPLICATION TO SUB- CENTRAL  
STATE- OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES  
 
 
Pursuant to Article 18.9 (Application to Sub Central State -Owned 
Enterprises and Designated Monopolies ), the following obligations shall not 
apply with respect to a state -owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sub-
central level of government and a designated monopoly designated by a sub-
central level of government:29 
 (a) For Australia:  
 
(i) paragraphs 1(a) and (b) of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations);  
 (ii) paragraph 2 of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment 
and Commercial Considerations); 
 (iii) subparagraphs 1(a) and 2(a) of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Australia;  
 (iv) s ubparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) and 2(c) of Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance) ; and  
 
(v) paragraph 1 of Article 18. 10 (Transparency). 
 (b) For the UK:  
 
(i) paragraphs 1(a) and (b) of Article 18.4 (Non-discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations);  
 (ii) paragraph 2 of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment 
and Commercial Considerations);  
 (iii) subparagraphs 1(a) and 2(a) of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the te rritory of the UK;  
 (iv) s ubparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) and 2(c) of Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance) ; and  
 
                                                      
29 For the purposes of this Annex, “sub -central level of government” means the regional level of 
government and the local level of  government of a Party.  (v) paragraph 1 of Article 18. 10 (Transparency).  CHAPTER 19 
 
SMALL AND MEDIUM -SIZED ENTERPRISES  
 
 
Article 19.1 
General Provisions 
 
1.  The Parties recognise the importance of:  
 
(a) SMEs  in their bilateral trade and investment relations; and  
 (b) provisions in this Agreement that are of particular benefit to SMEs .  
 
2. The Parties affirm their commitment to promoting an environment that:  
(a) facilitates and supports the development, growth, and competitiveness 
of SMEs ; 
 (b) promotes job creation in SMEs ; and  
 
(c) enhance s SMEs’  ability to benefit from this Agreement.  
 
3.  The Parties recognise the importance of current initiatives, efforts and work on SMEs  developed in relevant international fora, and in taking into account  their 
findings and recommendations, where appropriate.  
 4. The Parties recognise the importance of the participation  of SMEs  owned or led  
by under -represented groups, such as women, youth, indigenous peoples, 
persons with a disability  and minority groups in international trade . 
 5.  The Parties also recognise the relevance of:  
 
(a) working cooperatively to identify and address barriers to SMEs ’ access 
to international markets;  
(b) considering the needs of SMEs  when formulating new legislation, 
regulation  and product standards; and  
 
(c) assessing the effects of globalisation on SMEs  and, in particular, 
examining issues related to SMEs’  access to financing and to support 
for innovation.  Article 19.2  
Information Sharing  
 
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain its own publicly accessible website containing information regarding this Agreement, including: 
 
(a) the full text of this Agreement;  
 (b) a summary of this Agreement; and  
 (c) information designed for SMEs  that contains:  
 
(i) a description of the provisions in this Agreement that the Party considers to be relevant to SMEs; and  
 
(ii) any additional information that the Party considers useful for SMEs  interested in benefitting from the opportunities provided 
by this Agreement. 
 2. Each Party shall  include in its website referred to in paragraph 1 links to:  
 
(a) the equivalent website of the other Party ; and 
 (b) the websites of its own government agencies or authorities and other appropriate entities that provide information the Party considers use ful 
to any person interested in trading, investing or doing business in that Party’s territor y. 
 
3. Subject to each Party’s laws and regulations, the information described in subparagraph 2(b) may include: 
 
(a) customs  regulations and procedures;
1   
 
(b)  enquiry points;  
 (c) regulations and procedures concerning intellectual property rights;  
 
(d) technical  regulations, standards, and sanitary and phytosanitary measures 
relating to importation and exportation;  
 
(e) foreign  investment regulations; 
                                                 
1 This may include links to information on customs or other fees, including product -specific fees, imposed 
or in connection with importation and exportation; and duty drawback, deferral or other types of relief 
that reduce, refund or exempt customs duties .  (f) business registration procedures;  
 
(g) employment regulations;  
 (h) taxation information;  
 (i) trade promotion programmes;  
 (j) information related to the temporary entry of business persons  as 
defined in Chapter 11 (Temporary Entry for Business Persons); and 
 
(k) rules on government  procurement.  
 
4. Each Party shall include in the website referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 a link to 
a database that is electronically searchable including where possible  by HS code, 
and that may include, if the Party considers applicable, the following information 
with respect to access to its market:   
 
(a) rates of customs duty to be applied by the Party to the originating  goods 
of the other Party; 
 (b) the most -favoured -nation applied rates of customs duty;  
 (c) tariff rate quotas established by the Party; 
 (d) rules of origin;  and 
 (e) other relevant measures  as agreed by the Parties.  
 
5. Each Party shall regularly, or on request of the other Party, review the 
information and links on the website referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 to ensure that such information and links are  up to date and accurate.  
 6.
  Each Party may recommend additional information that the other Party may 
consider including on its website referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. 
  
Article 19.3  
Contact Points on SMEs  
  
1. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point on SMEs . 
 2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change to its contact point.  3. The contact points shall:  
 
(a)  facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter the Party considers relevant to SMEs ; 
 (b) exchange information to assist  in monitoring the implementation of this 
Agreement as it relates to SMEs ; and  
 (c) where appropriate, facilitate coordination between the Parties  and any 
committee, working group or other subsidiary body established by this 
Agreement , on any matter covered by this Chapter.  
  
Article 19.4  
Cooperation to Increase Trade and Investment Opportunities for SMEs  
 1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of  cooperating to achieve progress in 
reducing barriers to SMEs’  access to international markets.   
 2.  The Parties may under take activities to strengthen cooperation under this Chapter 
including: 
 
(a)  identifying ways to assist SMEs  of the Parties to take advantage of the 
commercial  opportunities under this Agreement ;  
 
(b)  exchanging and discussing each Party’s experiences and best practices in 
supporting and assisting SMEs  with respect to, among other things: 
 
(i) training programmes;  
 (ii) trade education;  
 (iii) trade finance;  
 
(iv) identifying commercial partners in the other Party; 
 (v) establishing good business credentials; and 
 (vi) payment practices in the other Party’s market . 
 
(c)  facilitating  the development of programmes to assist SMEs to participate 
in and integrate effectively into global markets and supply chains; 
 
(d)  identifying non- tariff barriers that adversely affect trade outcomes for 
SMEs and considering ways to minimise these barriers;  (e) exchanging information relating to the participation of SMEs in digital 
trade and e -commerce, with a view to assisting SMEs to take advantage 
of opportunities resulting from this A greement ; and 
 
(f) considering any other matter pertaining to SMEs, including any issues 
raised by SMEs regarding their ability to benefit from this Agreement. 
 
3. In carrying out any activities or programmes pursuant to paragraph 2, the Parties 
may seek to collaborate with experts, international organisations, or the private 
sector, as appropriate.  
 
 
Article 19.5  
Other Provisions that Benefit SMEs  
 
The Parties recognise that , in addition to the provisions in this Chapter, 
there are provisions in this Agreement that seek to enhance cooperation between 
the Parties on SME issues, or that may be of benefit to SMEs .  
  
Article 19.6  
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 30 
(Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  CHAPTER 20 
 
INNOVATION 
 
 
Article 20.1 
Definitions  
 
 For the purposes of this Chapter:  “innovation” means the development or implementation of a new or 
improved product, process, or organisational method, or combination thereof. 
  
Article 20.2 
Objective  
 
 The objective of this Chapter is to support trade and economic growth 
between  the Parties t hrough collaboration on innovation, consistent with the 
laws, regulations and policies of each Party . 
  
Article 20.3 
General Provisions 
 1. The Parties recognise the important role that innovation plays in their economies, including by stimulating competitiveness, increasing productivity, encourag ing investment and promoting international trade. 
 2.
 The Parties confirm that their intention is for this Agreement to support 
innovation in their respective economies, including by fostering  
opportunities in innovation- intensive industries and encouraging trade in 
innovative goods and services.  
 3. T he Parties acknowledge the existing collaboration on innovation between 
their governments, industries, universities, publicly funded research agencies and other non- governmental bodies, and confirm their commitment to further 
strengthening this collaboration. 
  
Article 20.4 
Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technologies  
 1. The Parties recognise that emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence  and other digital technologies , are becoming increasingly 
important within the global economy, and offer significant social and economic benefits.   
2. The Parties shall cooperate, where appropriate through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue established pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 20.5 
(Strategic Innovation Dialogue) , in activities aimed at encouraging the 
development and adoption of emerging technologies , and facilitating trade in 
related products and services.  Those activities may include:  
 
(a) sharing research and industry practices related to emerging technologies and their governance; 
 
(b) promoting and sustaining the responsible use and adoption of emerging technologies by businesses and across the community; 
 
(c) encouraging commercialisatio n opportunities and collaboration 
between research institutions, industries and businesses related to emerging technologies;  
 
(d) playing an active role in the development of international standards, regulations and conformity assessment procedures that p rovide clear 
expectations for businesses and support the growth of emerging technologies; 
 
(e) facilitating and promoting investment in research and development related to emerging technologies; and 
 
(f) facilitating and promoting trade in emerging technologies, including by exchanging views on effective trade policy approaches.  
 3. The Parties also recognise the importance of developing governance frameworks for the trusted, safe, and responsible use of emerging technologies that will help realise the benefits of these technologies.  The 
Parties further acknowledge the benefits of en suring that those  frameworks 
are internationally aligned as far as possible.
  To this end, the Parties shall 
endeavour to:  
 
(a) collaborate on , and promote the  development and adoption of , 
governance frameworks that support the trusted, safe, and responsible use of emerging technologies, through relevant international fora, in particular the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence; and  
 
(b) take into consideration  internationally  recognised principles or 
guidelines, in particular the Organisa tion for Economic Cooperation 
and Development’s Principles on Artificial Intelligence  adopted by 
its Council on 22 May 2019, when developing those  frameworks.  Article 20.5 
Strategic Innovation Dialogue 
 
1. The Parties hereby establish a Strategic Innovation Dialogue for the purposes of facilitating an open business environment that supports and stimulates innovation in their territories, promoting and strengthening trade -facilitative 
innovation policy, ident ifying unnecessary barriers to trade in innovative 
goods and services, and identifying other opportunities  to further the 
objective of this Chapter. 
 2. Through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue, the Parties shall mutually identify areas of cooperation to promote and facilitate innovation in their territories.  Examples of areas of cooperation may include:  (a) regulatory approaches that facilitate innovation, including the uptake and implementation of international innovation best practice standards;  
 
(b) emerging and transformative technologies , including  clean and low 
emissions technologies, artificial intelligence , and other digital 
technologies; 
 
(c) the commercial application of new technologies, including in 
economic sectors such as agriculture, health, energy, mineral 
resources, space, and manufacturing; 
 
(d) value chain matters, including supply chain resilience ; and 
 
(e) global innovation networks and cross -border trade in intangible 
assets, including through higher education and research collaboration . 
 3. Through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue, the Parties shall:  
(a) share best practice principles and explore opportunities in innovation policy across government, academia, research organisations, industry and business; 
 (b) review existing relationships for opportunities to strengthen bilateral engagement on the impacts of innovation on trade and investment;  
 (c) explore ways in which innovation can further promote trade and investment; and 
 (d) consider any other matter that the Parties  deem appropriate which 
furthers the objective  of this Chapter.  4. Consistent with the objective of this Chapter, the Strategic Innovation 
Dialogue may develop a cooperative activity between the Parties in an area of mutual interest.  
 5. The Parties may consult  with or seek advice from a qualified non-
governmental expert  or stakeholde r in relation to furthering the objective of 
this Chapter , including by inviting them to participate in the Strategic 
Innovation Dialogue.  
 6. The Strategic Innovation Dialogue shall be co- chaired by a representative 
from each Party.  
 7. The Strategic Innovation Dialogue shall convene within 12 months of the 
date of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter  at least once every 
two years,  unless the Par ties agree otherwise. 
 8 Each Party shall, on entry into force of this Agreement, designate a contact 
point for the Strategic Innovation Dialogue and notify the other Party of that 
contact point .  Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change 
to those contact details.  
 9.  The Strategic Innovation Dialogue may engage with any committee, working group, or other subsidiary body established  under this Agreement to further 
the objective of this Chapter.
1 
 10. The Joint Committee may refer a matter to the Strategic Innovation Dialogue 
for its consideration. 
  
Article 20.6 
Review  of this Agreement  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring that the disciplines contained in this Agreement remain relevant to the trade and investment issues and challenges confronting them, including those arising from innovation. 
 2. Where a review is conducted pursuant to paragraph 1 and in accordance with 
subparagraph 3(a) of Article 32.6 ( General Review  – Final Provisions ), the 
Parties shall take into account developments in innovation, including as 
discussed through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue. 
  
                                                            
1 The Strategic Innovation Dialogue shall not be considered a committee, working group , or other 
subsidiary body established under this Agreement for the purposes of Chapter 29 (Administrative and 
Institutional Arrangements) .  Article 20.7 
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  CHAPTER 21 
LABOUR  
 
 
Article 21.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
 
“ILO Declaration ” means the International Labour Organization (“ ILO”) 
Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow -
up done at Geneva on 18 June 1998;  
 
“labour laws ” means laws and regulations,1 or provisions of laws and 
regulations, of a Party that are directly related to the following internationally recognised labour rights: 
 
(a)  freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to 
collective bargaining;  
 
(b)  the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour; 
 
(c) the effective abolition of child labour, a prohibition on the worst 
forms of child labour and other labour for children and minors;  
(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and 
occupa tion; and 
 (e) acceptable conditions of work with respect to minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and health; and 
 “modern s lavery ” means human trafficking, slavery  and slavery- like 
practices, including  servitude, and forced or compulsory labour, as defined 
in the laws and regulations of each Party . 
  
Article 21.2 
Right to Regulate  and Levels of Protection  
 
1. Each  Party recognises the sovereign right of the other  Party to establish its 
own levels of domestic labour protection and its own priorities  on labour, and 
to establish, adopt or modify its  labour laws  and policies accordingly, in a 
                                                            
1 For Australia, “laws and regulations ” or “laws or regulations ” means an Act of the Commonwealth 
Parliament, or a regulation made by the Governor -General in Council under delegated authority under 
an Act of the Commonwealth Parliament, that is enforceable at the central level of government.  manner consistent with its international labour commitments  referred to  in 
this Chapter. 
 
2. Each Party shall strive to ensure that its labour laws and policies  provide for 
and encourage high levels of labour protection and shall strive to continue to 
improve such laws and policies with the goal of providing high levels of 
labour protection.  
 
 
Article 21.3 
Statement of Shared Commitment  
 
1. The Parties affirm their obligations as members of the ILO, including those 
stated in the ILO Declaration, regarding labour rights within their 
territories.  
 
2. The Parties recognise that, as stated in paragraph 5 of the ILO Declaration, 
labour standards should not be used for protectionist trade purposes. 
 
 
Article 21.4 
Labour Rights  
 
1. Each Party shall adopt and maintain in its  laws and regulations, and 
practices thereunder, the following rights as stated in the ILO 
Declaration2,3: 
 
(a) freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to 
collective bargaining;  
 (b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;  (c) the effective abolition of child labour and, for the purposes of this 
Agreement, a prohibition on the worst forms of child labour; and 
 (d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and 
occupation. 
 
                                                            
2 The obligations set out in Article 21.4 (Labour Rights), as they relate to the ILO, refer only to the 
ILO Declaration.  
3 To establish a violation of an obligation under paragraph 1 of Article  21.4 (Labour Rights) a Party 
shall  demonstrate that the other Party has failed to adopt or maintain a  law, regulation or practice to 
encourage trade or investment.  2. Each Party shall adopt and maintain laws and regulations, and practices 
thereunder, governing acceptable conditions of work with respect to minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and health.
4 
 
 
Article 21.5 
Non Derogation 
 
The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or 
investment by weakening or reducing the protections afforded in each Party’s labour laws.  Accordingly, neither Party shall waive or otherwise derogate 
from, or offer to waive or otherwis e derogate from, its laws or regulations:  
 
(a) implementing paragraph 1 of Article 21.4 (Labour Rights) , if the 
waiver or derogation would be inconsistent with a right set out in that 
paragraph; or  
 (b) implementing paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 21.4 (Labour Rights), if the 
waiver or derogation would weaken or reduce adherence to  a right set 
out in paragraph 1 of Article 21.4 (Labour Rights), or to a condition 
of work referred to in  paragraph 2 of Article 21.4 (Labour Rights) , in 
a special trade or customs area, such as an export processing zone or foreign trade zone, in the Party’s territory,  
 in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.  
 
 
Article 21.6 
Enforcement of Labour Laws  
 
1. Neither Party shall fail to effectively enforce its labour laws through a 
sustained or recurring course of action or inaction  in a manner affecting  trade 
or investment  between the Parties after the date of entry into force of this 
Agreement . 
 
2. If a Party fails to comply with an obligation under this Chapter, a decision 
made by that Party on the provision of enforcement resources shall not excuse that failure.  Each Party retains the right to exercise reasonable enforcement 
discretion and to make bona fide decisions with regard to the allocation of 
enforcement resources between labour enforcement activities among the 
fundamental labour rights and acceptable conditions of work enumerated in Article 21.4 (Labour Rights), provided that the exercise of that disc retion, 
and those decisions, are not inconsistent with its obligations under this Chapter. 
                                                            
4 For greater certainty, this obligation relates to the establishment by a Party in its  laws, regulations 
and practices thereu nder, of acceptable conditions of work as determined by that Party.   
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to empower a Party’s authorities 
to undertake labour law enforcement activities in the territory of the other  
Party.  
 
 
Article 21.7 
Modern Slavery  
 1. The Parties affirm their endorsement of the  Call to Action to End Forced 
Labour, Modern Slavery and Human Trafficking launched 
at the UN General 
Assembly in New York City on  19 September 2017, their commitment to 
advancing the Principles to Guide Government Action to Combat Human 
Trafficking in Global Supply Chains  and the  United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights . The Parties underline the 
importance of ratification of the Protocol of 2014 to the ILO Forced Labour Convention, 1930, done at Geneva on 11 June 2014. 
 2. Each Party shall , subject to its laws and regulations, strive to ensure that 
private and public sector entities  operating in its territory take appropriate 
steps to prevent modern s lavery in their supply chains.  To this end, each 
Party shall , to the extent it considers appropriate, adopt or maintain measures : 
 
(a) to facilitate private sector entities  to identify and address modern 
slavery  in their global and domestic supply chains, including by 
publishing relevant guidance to raise awareness, to promote responsible business conduct, and to foster  collaboration across 
sectors and with civil society;  
 
(b) to require  responsible business conduct and supply chain transparency 
in respect of private sector entities  operating in its territory, including 
regular public reporting on steps taken; 
 
(c) to facilitate public sector entities  to identify and address modern 
slavery in their global and domestic supply chains.  To this end, each 
Party shall also strive towards transparency and regular public 
communication of the actions public sector entities  have taken in this 
respect;  
 
(d) to facilitate  the improvement of the capability of staff in public sector 
entities  working on government procurement and commercial  matters  
to identify and address modern slavery in supply chains; and  
 (e) to deter  the use of fees for work- finding services sought from or 
charged to workers in sectors considered appropriate by the Party.   
3. To assist in the implementation of paragraph 2, the Parties shall endeavour t o 
cooperate, share information and best practice, and, as appropriate, identify 
areas of alignment to tackle modern s lavery . 
 
 
Article 21.8 
Non-Discrimination and  Gender  Equality in the Workplace  
   
1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of gender equality and non-discrimination in employment and income opportunities for sustainable, 
equitable , and inclusive economic growth.  Accordingly, each Party affirms 
its commitments to non -discrimination in employment, occupations, and 
places of work, and to take measures to advance anti -discrimination practices 
and address discriminatory practices, including those related to workplace 
sexual harassment, gender -based violence, gender pay gaps , and flexible 
working arrangements, as well as improve women’s access to decent work.  
2. The Parties agree to share information on their respective domestic approaches and cooperate, as appropriate, on activities to address 
discriminatory practices, promote equality of opportunity in employment, 
and improve women’s access to decent work and the benefits of trade or 
investment.  The Parties recognise the importance of carrying out cooperation 
activities with the inclusive participation of women.  
 
 
Article 21.9 
Corporate Social Responsibility  
 
Each Party shall endeavour to encourage enterprises to voluntarily 
adopt corporate social responsibility initiatives on labour issues that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party. 
 
 
Article 21.10  
Public Awareness and Procedural Guarantees  
 
1. Each Party shall promote public awareness of its labour laws, including by ensuring that information related to its labour laws and enforcement and compliance procedures is publicly available.  
 
2. Each Party shall ensure that persons with a recognised inte rest under its law 
in a particular matter have appropriate access to impartial and independent tribunals for the enforcement of the Party’s labour laws.  These tribunals may  include administrative tribunals, quasi -judicial tribunals, judicial tribunals , or 
labour tribunals, as provided for in each Party’s law.  
 
3. Each Party shall ensure that proceedings before these tribunals for the 
enforcement of its labour laws: 
 
(a) are fair, equitable, and transparent;  
  
(b) comply with due process of law; and 
 
(c) do not entail unreasonable fees or time limits or unwarranted delays. 
 
4. Any hearings in these proceedings shall be open to the public, except when 
the administration of justice otherwise requires, and in accordance with its applicable law . 
 
5. Each Party shall ensure that:  
 
(a) the parties to these proceedings are entitled to support or defend their 
respective positions, including by presenting information or evidence; and 
 (b) final decisions on the merits of the case:  
 
(i) are based on information or evidence in respect of which the 
parties were offered the opportunity to be heard; 
 
(ii) state the reasons on which they are based; and  
 
(iii) are available in writing without undue delay to the parties to 
the proceedings and, consistent with its law, to the public. 
 
6. Each Party shall provide that parties to these proceedings have the right to 
seek review or appeal, as appropriate under its law.  
 
7. Each Party shall ensure that the parties to these proceedings have access to 
remedies under its law for the effectiv e enforcement of their rights under the 
Party’s labour laws and that these remedies are executed in a timely manner.  
 
8. Each Party shall provide procedures to effectively enforce the final decisions of its tribunals in these proceedings. 
 9. For greater certainty, and without prejudice to whether a tribunal’s decision 
is inconsistent with a Party’s obligations under this Chapter, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a tribunal of a Party to reopen a decision that it has made in a particul ar matter.  Article 21.11  
Public Submissions  
 
1. Each Party, through its contact point designated under Article 21.14 (Contact 
Points), shall provide for the receipt and consideration of written submissions 
from persons of a Party on matters related to this Chapter in accordance with 
its domestic procedures.  Each Party shall make readily accessible and 
publicly available its procedures, including timelines, for the receipt and 
consideration of written submissions.  
2. A Party may provide in its procedures that, to be eligible for consideration, a submission should, at a minimum:  
 
(a) raise an issue directly relevant to this Chapter;  
 
(b) clearly identify the person or organisation making the submission;  and 
 
(c) explain, to the degree possible, how and to what extent the issue raised 
affects trade or investment between the Parties.  
 3. Each Party shall:  
 
(a) consider matters raised by the submission and provide a timely response to the person or organisation that made the submission , 
including in writing as appropriate; and  
 
(b)  make the submission and the results of its consideration available to the other P arty and the public, as appropriate, in a timely manner. 
 
4. A Party may request from the person or organisation that made the 
submission additional information that is necessary to consider the substance 
of the submission.   
Article 21.12  
Cooperation 
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation as a mechanism for effective implementation of this Chapter, to enhance opportunities to improve labour standards and to further advance common commitments 
regarding  labour matters, including workers’ wellbeing and quality of life 
and the principles and rights stated in the ILO Declaration. 
 
2. In undertaking cooperative activities, the Parties shall be guided by the following principles:  (a) consideration of each Party’s priorities, level of development and 
available resources;  
 (b) broad involvement of, and mutual benefit to, the Parties;  
(c) relevance of capacity and capability -building activities, including 
technical assistance between the Parties to address labour protection issues and activities to promote innovative workplace practices;  
 
(d) generation of measurable, positive , and meaningful labour outcomes;  
 
(e) resource efficiency, including through the use of technology, as appropriate, to optimise resources used in cooperative activities; 
 
(f) complementarity with existing regional and multilateral initiatives to 
address labour issues; and  
 
(g) transparency and public participation. 
 
3. Each Party shall invite the views and, as appropriate, participation of its 
stakeholders, including worker and employer representatives, in identifying potential areas for cooperation and undertaking cooperative activities.  
Subject to the agreement of each Party , cooperative activities may take place 
bilaterally and in international fora  such as the ILO . 
 4. All cooperative activities under this Chapter are subject to the availability of funds and of human and other resources, and to the applicable laws and regulations of the Parties.  The Parties shall decide, on a case-by- case basis, 
the funding of cooperative activities. 
 5. In addition to the cooperative activities outlined in this Article, the Parties shall, as appropriate, caucus and leverage their respective membership in  
regional a nd multilateral fora to further their common interests in addressing 
labour issues. 
 6. Areas of cooperation may include: 
 
(a) promotion of the awareness of and respect for principles and rights as stated in the ILO Declaration and for the concept of Decent Work as defined by the ILO; 
 
(b) labour laws and practices, including the effective implementation of the principles and rights as stated in the ILO Declaration ; 
 
(c) sharing best practice and the promotion and protection of equality and 
elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation for migrant workers, or in the areas of age, disability, gender, pregnancy, race, sexual orientation, and other characteristics  of a diverse, multigenerational  workforce that are not related to merit 
or the requirements of employment; 
 
(d) collection and use of statistics; and 
 
(e) any other areas as agreed by the Parties.  
 
7. The Parties may undertake activities in the areas of cooperation in paragraph 
6 through: 
 
(a)  workshops, seminars, dialogues , and other fora to share knowledge, 
experiences and best practices, including online fora and other knowledge- sharing platforms;  
 
(b)  study trips, visits , and research studies to document and study policies 
and practices;  
 (c)  collaborative research and development related to best practices in subjects of mutual interest;  
 (d)  specific exchanges of technical expertise and assistance, as 
appropriate; and 
 
(e)  other forms as the Parties may decide.  
 
 
Article 21.13  
Committee on Cooperation  
 
The Committee on Cooperation established under Article 27.4 
(Committee on Cooperation - Cooperation) shall consider any matter under 
this Chapter related to cooperation and support any cooperation activities. 
 
 
Article 21.14  
Contact Points  
 
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point for this Chapter and shall notify the other Party of the contact details of that contact point within 30 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.  Each Party shall promptly 
notify the other Party of any change to those contact details.  
 
2. Any request, notification, or other document provided in accordance with this 
Chapter shall be delivered to the other Party through its designated contact point.  Article 21.15  
Public Engagement  
 
1. The Parties shall provide a means for receiving and considering the views of 
interested persons on matters related to this Chapter.  
 
2. Each Party shall establish or maintain, and consult, a l abour consultative or 
advisory body or similar mechanism, for members of its public, including 
representatives of its labour and business organisations, to provide views on matters regarding this Chapter.  
 
 
Article 21.16  
Labour Consultations  and Dispute Settlement  
 1. The Parties shall make every effort to resolve any matter arising under this 
Chapter through cooperation and consultation based on the principle of 
mutual respect . 
 2. A Party (“the requesting Party”) may , at any time  request  labour consultations 
with the other Party (“the responding Party”) regarding any matter arising under this Chapter by delivering a written request to the responding Party’s contact point.  The requesting Party shall include information that is specific 
and sufficient to enable the responding Party to respond, including identification of the matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis of the 
request.  The requesting Party shall circulate the request to  the responding 
Party through their respective contact points.  
 
3. The responding Party, shall unless agreed otherwise with the requesting 
Party, reply to the request  in writing no later than seven days after the date of 
its receipt.   The responding Party shall enter into labour consultations in good 
faith. 
 4. The Partie s shall begin labour consultations no later than 30 days after the 
date of receipt by the responding Party of the request. 
 5. In labour consultations : 
 
(a) each Party shall provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of the matter; and 
 (b) each Party shall treat any confidential information exchanged in the course of the consultations on the same basis as the Party providing the information. 
 6. Labour consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to the Parties.  If labour consultations are held in person, they shall  be held in the capital of the responding Party, unless the Parties agree 
otherwise.  
 7. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory 
resolution of the matter through labour consultations under this Article, taking into account opportunities for cooperation related to the matter.  The 
Parties may request advice from an independent expert or experts chosen by consulting Parties to assist them.   The Parties may have recourse to such 
procedures as good offices, conciliation, or mediation. 
 8. In labour consultations under this Article, a Party may request the other Party to make available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies with expertise in the matter that is the subject of the labour consultations. 
 9. If the Parties are unable to resolve the matter,  either  Party may request the 
Joint Committee to convene to consider the matter by delivering a written request to the other Party through its contact point.  The Joint Committee 
shall convene no later than 30 days after the day of the receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise, and shall seek to resolve the matter, 
including, if appropriate , by consulting independent experts and having 
recourse to such procedures as good offices, conciliation, or mediation.  
 10. If the Parties are able to resolve the matter, they shall document any outcome 
including, if appr opriate, specific steps and timelines agreed upon . The 
Parties shall make the outcome document available to the public, unless they agree otherwise.  
 11. If the Parties  have failed to resolve the matter no later than 60 days after the 
day of the receipt of  a request under paragraph 2, or any other period as the 
Parties may agree, the requesting Party may request the establishment of a 
panel under Article 30.8 ( Request for Establishment of a Panel – Dispute 
Settlement ) and, as provided in Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement), thereafter 
have recourse to the other provisions of that Chapter. 
 12. In addition to the requirements set out in paragraph 1(a) of Article 30.10 (Qualification of Panellists – Dispute Settlement), for a dispute arising under 
this Ch apter panellists other than the chair shall have sufficient expertise or 
experience in labour law or practice. 
 13. Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 30  
(Dispute Settlement) for a matter arising under this Chapter without first seeking to resolve the matter in accordance with this Article.  
 14. Labour consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of a Party in any other proceedings.  
 
 CHAPTER  22 
 
ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
Article 22.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“environmental law” means a law or regulation of a Party, or provision thereof, including any that  implements the Party’s obligations under a 
multilateral environmental agreement, the primary purpose of which is the protection of the environment, or the prevention of a danger to human life or health, through:  
 
(a) the prevention, abatement or control of: the release, discharge or emission of pollutants or environmental contaminants including greenhouse gases;   
 
(b) the control of environmentally hazardous or toxic chemicals, substances, materials or wastes, and the dissemination of information 
related thereto; or   
 
(c) the protection or conservation of wild flora or fauna, including endangered species, their habitat, and specially protected natural areas,
1, 2 
 
but does not include a law or regulat ion, or provision thereof, directly related 
to worker safety or health, nor any law or regulation, or provision thereof, the primary purpose of which is managing the subsistence or aboriginal harvesting of natural resources;  
 
For Australia,  “law or regulatio n” means an Act of the Commonwealth 
Parliament, or a regulation made by the Governor -General in Council under 
delegated authority under an Act of the Commonwealth Parliament, that is enforceable at the central level of government; and  
     
                                                            
1 For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “specially protected natural areas” means those areas as 
defined by the Party in it s laws and regulations.  
2 The Parties recognise that such protection or conservation may include the protection or 
conservation of biological diversity.  
 
 Article 22.2 
Objectives  
 
1. The objectives of this Chapter are to promote mutually supportive trade and 
environmental policies; promote high levels of environmental protection and effective enforcement of environmental laws; and enhance the capacities of the Parties to  address trade- related environmental issues, including through 
cooperation. 
 2. Taking account of their respective domestic priorities and circumstances, the 
Parties recognise that enhanced cooperation to protect and conserve the environment and sustainabl y manage their natural resources brings benefits 
that can contribute to sustainable development, strengthen their environmental governance, and complement the objectives of this 
Agreement.  
 3. The Parties further recognise that it is inappropriate to estab lish or use their 
environmental laws or other environmental measures in a manner which 
would constitute a disguised restriction on trade or investment between the Parties.  
  
Article 22.3 
General Commitments  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of mutually supportive trade and environmental policies and practices to improve environmental protection in the furtherance of sustainable development. 
 2. The Parties recognise the sovereign right of each Party to establish its own levels of domestic enviro nmental protection and its own priorities relating to 
the environment, including climate change, and to establish, adopt or modify its environmental laws and policies accordingly.  
 3. Each Party shall strive to ensure that its environmental laws and policies provide for, and encourage, high levels of environmental protection and to continue to improve its respective levels of environmental protection.   
 4. Neither Party shall fail to e ffectively enforce its environmental laws through 
a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.   
 5. The Parties recognise that each Party retains the right to exercise discretion and to make decisions regarding:  
 
(a) investigatory, prosecutorial, regulatory , and compliance matters; and  
 
 (b) the allocation of environmental enforcement resources with respect 
to other environmental laws determined to have a higher priority.   
 
Accordingly, the Parties understand that with respect to the enforcement of environmental laws, a Party is in compliance  with paragraph 4  if a course of 
action or inaction reflects a reasonable exercise of that discretion, or results from a bona fide decision regarding the allocation of those resources in accordance with priorities for enforcement of its environmental laws.  
 6. Without pre judice to paragraph 2, the  Parties recognise that it is inappropriate 
to encourage trade or investment by weakening or reducing the protection afforded in their respective environmental laws.  Accordingly, a Party shall 
not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from, its environmental laws in a manner that weakens or reduces the protection afforded in those laws in order to encourage trade or investment between the Parties.  
 7. Where a Party has defined environmental law under Article  22.1 
(Defi nitions) to include only laws and regulations at the central level of 
government (first Party) and where the other Party (second Party) considers 
that an environmental law at the sub -central level of government of the first 
Party is not being effectively enforced by the relevant sub- central  level of 
government through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties, the second Party may request a dialogue with the first Party.  The request shall contain 
information that is specific and sufficient to enable the first Pa rty to evaluate 
the matter at issue, and an indication of how the matter is negatively affecting 
trade or investment of the second Party. 
 8. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to empower a Party’s authorities to undertake environmental law enforcement activities in the territory  of the 
other Party. 
  
Article 22.4 
Multilateral Environmental Agreements  
 
1. The Parties recognise that multilateral environmental agreements to which they are party play an important role, globally and domestically, in protecting the environment, and that their respective implementation of these agreements is critical to achieving  the environmental objectives of these 
agreements.  Accordingly, each Party affirms its commitment to implement the multilateral environmental agreements to which it is a party.  
 2. The Parties emphasise the need to enhance the mutual supportiveness between trade and environmental law and policies, through dialogue between the Parties on trade and environmental issues of mutual interest, particularly  
 
 with respect to the negotiation and implementation of relevant multilateral 
environmental agreements and trade agreements.  
  
Article 22.5 
Climate Change  
 
1. Each Party affirms its commitment to address climate change, including under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  done 
at New York on 9 May 1992 and the Paris Agreement  done at Paris on 12 
December 2015 (“Paris Agreement”), to which both Parties are party, and recognises the importance of achieving their goals. 
 2. The Parties emphasise that efforts to address climate change require collective and urgent action, and acknowledge the role of global trade and investment in these efforts.  
 3. The Parties recognise the important role that cooperation can play in addressi ng climate change.  Consistent with Article 22.20 (Cooperation 
Frameworks), the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of mutual interest 
which may include:   (a) emission reduction opportunities across all sectors and greenhouse gases; 
 (b) exchange on policies, laws , and measures that can contribute to a 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions ; 
 (c) development and acceleration of cost -effective, low , and zero 
emissions technologies;  
 
(d) clean and renewable energy sources and supporting infrastructure  and 
enabling technologies ;  
 
(e) energy efficiency ; 
 (f) sustainable transport and sustainable urban infrastructure development; 
 
(g) addressing deforestation and forest degradation; 
 
(h) emissions measurement, reporting, and verification ;  
 
(i) climate change adaptation and resilience; 
 
(j) nature- based solutions to mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate 
change; and  
 
 (k) capacity building and development assistance for climate vulnerable 
countries. 
  
Article 22.6 
Environmental Goods and Services  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of trade and investment in environmental goods and services as a means of improving environmental and economic performance, contributing to clean growth, and addressing global environmental challenges.  
 2. Accordingl y, each Party shall facilitate and promote, as appropriate, trade 
and investment in environmental goods and services, including environmental and low emissions technologies, clean and renewable energy and enabling infrastructure, and energy efficient goods and services.  
 3. The Environment Working Group shall consider issues identified by a Party 
or the Parties related to trade in environmental goods and services, including 
issues identified as potential non- tariff barriers to that trade. The Parties shall  
endeavour to address any potential barrier  to trade in environmental goods 
and services that may be identified by a Party, including by working through the Environment Working Group and in conjunction with other relevant 
committees established under this Agreement, as appropriate.  
 4. The Parties shall cooperate bilaterally  and in international fora, as 
appropriate, on ways to enhance trade  and investment  in environmental 
goods and services. 
  
Article 22.7 
Circular Economy 
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of a transition towards a circular economy and the role that waste avoidance and greater resource efficiency can play in reducing pressure on the natural environment, improving resource security, and reducing other associated negative environmental effects arising from the use of materials throughout their lifecycle.  The Parties 
further recognise the role that trade can play in achieving these goals through trade in second- hand goods, end-of- life products, secondary mat erials, 
processed waste, as well as trade in related services.  
 2. The Parties recognise the importance of avoiding the generation of waste and 
encouraging the reuse of products and resource efficient product design, including the designing of products to be easier to reuse, dismantle, or recycle 
at end of life.  The Parties also recognise the importance of encouraging 
environmental labelling, including eco- labelling, to make it easier for 
consumers to make more sustainable choices.  
 
 3. Consistent with Artic le 22.20 (Cooperation Frameworks), the Parties shall 
cooperate to address matters of mutual interest related to the transition 
towards a circular economy.  Areas of cooperation may include:  
 
(a) barriers to trade in relation to the circular economy; 
 
(b) environmental labelling , including eco- labelling;  
 
(c) sustainable supply chain management, including enhanced reverse logistics;  
 
(d) investment in, and financing of, circular economy projects; 
 
(e) reuse, repair, remanufacture, and recycling; 
 
(f) resource efficient product design that makes products more durable and easier to repair, recycle, and reuse;  
 
(g) extended producer responsibility;  
 
(h) technological innovation related to the circular economy including innovative approaches to recycling and litter reduction, processing waste, waste tracking mechanisms, data collection, sustainable plastic packaging, and alternative materials;  
 
(i) best pr actice in resource efficiency in key fields such as industrial 
symbiosis, sustainable use of chemicals and plastics, and new business models such as product service systems;  
 
(j) approaches to reducing the amount of waste sent to landfill and accelerating the movement of waste further up the waste hierarchy ; 
and 
 
(k) best practice on sustainable management of hazardous wastes.  
  
Article 22.8 
Ozone Depleting Substances and Hydrofluorocarbons  
 
1. The Parties recognise that emissions of certain substances can significantly deplete and otherwise modify the ozone layer in a manner that is likely to result in adverse effects on human health and the environment, and that the reduction of certain substances can address global environmental challenges, including climate change.  Accordingly, each Party shall take measures to  
 
 control the production and consumption of, and trade in, substances 
controlled by the Montreal Protocol.3, 4, 5  
 2. The Parties also recognise the importance of public participation and consultation, in accordance with their respective law or policy, in the development and implementation of measures concerning the protection of 
the ozone layer.  Each Party shall make pu blicly available appropriate 
information about its programmes and activities, including cooperative programmes, that are related to ozone depleting substances and hydrofluorocarbons.  
 3. Consistent with 22.20 (Cooperation Frameworks),  the Parties  shall co operate 
to address matters of mutual interest related to ozone- depleting substances 
and hydrofluorocarbons.  Cooperation may include exchanging information 
and experiences in areas related to:  
 
(a) environmentally friendly alternatives to ozone -depleting substances 
and hydrofluorocarbons, as well as emerging technologies for sustainable cooling and refrigeration;  
 
(b) refrigerant management practices, policies , and programmes 
including lifecycle man agement of coolants and refrigerants;  
 
(c) methodologies for stratospheric ozone measurements;   
 
(d) combating illegal trade in ozone -depleting substances and 
hydrofluorocarbons; and  
 
(e) barriers to trade in, and uptake of , sustainable cooling  and 
refrigeration technologies.  
  
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, this provision pertains to substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol on 
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer , done at Montreal on 16 September 1987 (“Montreal 
Protocol”), and any existing amendments or adjustments to the Montreal Protocol, including the 
Kigali Amendment  done at Kigali on  15 October 2016, and any future amendments or adjustments to 
which the Parties are parties.  
4 A Party shall be deemed in compliance with this provision if it maintains the measure or measures 
listed in Annex 22A, implementing its obligations under the Montreal Protocol , or any subsequent 
measure or measures that pr ovide an equivalent or higher level of environmental protection as the 
measure or measures listed.   
5 If compliance with this provision is not established pursuant to footnote 4 , to establish a violation 
of this provision, a Party must demonstrate that the other Party has failed to take measures to control the production and consumption of, and trade in,  substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol in a 
manner that is likely to result in adverse effects on human health and the environment, in a manner 
affecting trade or investment between the Parties.  
 
 Article 22.9 
Air Quality  
 
1. The Parties acknowledge that trade involving production, consumption, and 
transportation of goods across air, sea and land can cause air pollution and that air pollution can travel long distances and recognise the importance of reducing domestic and transboundary air pollution, and that cooperation can be beneficial in achieving these objectives.  
 2. The Parties recognise the importance of public participation and consultation in accordance with their respective  law or policy in the development and 
implementation of measures to reduce domestic and transboundary air 
pollution and in ensuring access to air quality data.  
 3. Consistent  with Article 22.20 ( Cooperation Frameworks ) the Parties shall 
cooperate to address matters of mutual interest with  respect to air quality, 
which may include:  
 
(a) ambient air quality planning;  
 
(b) modelling and monitoring, including spatial distribution of main sources and their emissions;  
 
(c) measurement and inventory methodologies for air quality and emissions measurements; and  
 
(d) reduction, control, and prevention technologies and practices.  
 
 
Artic le 22.10  
Protection of the Marine Environment from Ship Pollution  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of protecting and preserving the marine environment.  To that end, each Party shall take measures to prevent the 
pollution of the marine environment from ships.
6,7,8 
                                                            
6 For greater certainty, this provision pertains to pollution regulated by the International Convention 
for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships , done at London on 2 November 1973, as modified by the 
Protocol of 1978 relating to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships , 
done at London on 17 February 1978, and the Protocol of 1997 to Amend the Internat ional Convention 
for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 1973, as Modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto , 
done at London on 26 September 1997 ( “MARPOL Convention”), and any existing  and future 
amendments to the MARPOL Convention  to which the Parties are parties.  
7 A Party shall be deemed in compliance with this provision if it maintains the measure or measures 
listed in Annex 22 B implementing its obligations under MARPOL, or any subsequent measure or 
measures  that provide an equivalent or higher level of environmental protection as the measure or 
measures  listed.  
8 If compliance with this provision is not established pursuant  to footnote 7, to establish a violation 
of this provision, a Party must demonstrate that the other Party has failed to take measures  to prevent  
 
 2. The Parties also recognise the importance of public participation and 
consultation, in accordance with their respective law or policy, in the development and implementation of measures to prevent the pollution of the 
marine environment from ships.  Each Party shall make publicly available appropriate information about its programmes and activities, including cooperative programmes, that are related to the prevention of pollution of the marine environment from ships.  
 3. Consistent with Article 22.20 (Cooperation Frameworks), the Parties shall 
cooperate to address matters of mutual interest with respect to pollution of the marine environment from ships.  Areas of cooperation may include:  
 
(a) accidental pollution from ships;  
 (b) pollution from routine operations of ships;   (c) deliberate pollution from ships;   
 
(d) development of technologies to minimise ship- generated waste;  
 
(e) emissions from ships;  
 (f) adequacy of port waste reception facilities;  
 
(g) increased protection in special geographic areas; and  
 
(h) enforcement measures including notifications to flag States and, as 
appropriate, by port States . 
  
Article 22.11  
Marine Litter 
 
1. The Parties acknowledge that trade is a source of marine litter and the importance of taking action to prevent and reduce marine litter, including plastics and microplastics, in order to preserve marine and coastal ecosystems, prevent the loss of biodiversity, and mit igate marine litter’s costs 
and impacts.  
 2. Recognising the global nature of the challenge of marine litter, the Parties acknowledge the importance of maintaining measures under their 
environmental laws and policies to prevent and reduce marine litter and taking action to address marine litter in other fora.  
 3. Accordingly, the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of mutual interest with respect to combatting marine litter, which may include: 
                                                            
the pollution of the marine environment from ships , in a manner affecting trade or investment between 
the Parties.  
 
  
(a) addressing land and sea based pollution; 
 
(b) promoting waste management infrastructure;  
 
(c) advancing efforts related to abandoned, los t, or otherwise discarded 
fishing gear; and 
 (d) circular economy and waste management hierarchy measures  
relevant to addressing marine litter.  
  
Article 22.12  
Marine Wild Capture Fisheries
9 
 
1. The Parties acknowledge their role as major consumers, producers and traders of fisheries products , and the importance of the marine fisheries sector 
to their development and to the livelihoods of their fishing communities, including artisanal or small- scale fisheries.  The Parties also acknowledge 
that the fate of marine capture fisheries is an urgent resource problem facing the international community.  Accordingly, the Parties recognise the 
importance of taking measures aimed at the conservation and the sustainable 
management of fisheries.  
 2. In this regard, the Parties acknowledge that inadequate fisheries 
management, fisheries subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity, and illegal, unreported, and unregulated ( “IUU” ) fishing
10 can 
have significant negative impacts on trade, development and the environment, and recognise the need for  individual and collective action to 
address the problems of overfishing and unsustainable utilisation of fisheries resources, with appropriate consideration of the rights of c oastal States to 
fisheries resources and the obligations of coastal  States, f lag States and port 
States in managing fishing activity. 
 3. Accordingly, each Party shall operate a fisheries management system that regulates marine wild capture fishing and that is designed to:  
 
(a) prevent overfishing and overcapacity; 
 
(b) reduce bycatch  of non- target species and juveniles, including through 
the regulation of fishing gear that results in bycatch and the regulation of fishing in areas where bycatch is likely to occur; and 
 
                                                            
9 For greater certainty, this Article does not apply with respect to aquaculture.  
10 The term “illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing” is to be understood to have the same meaning 
as paragraph 3 of the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (“2001 IUU Fishing Plan of Action”) of the UN Food and Agricultural 
Organisation (“FAO”), adopted at Rome in 2001.  
 
 (c) promote the recovery of overfished stocks for all marine fisher ies in 
which that Party’s persons conduct fishing activities. 
 
Such a management system shall be based on the best scientific evidence 
available and on internationally recognised best practices for fisheries management and conservation as reflected in the relevant provisions of international instruments aimed at ensuring the sustainable use and conservation of marine species.
11 
 4. Each Party shall promote the long- term conservation of sharks, marine 
turtles, seabirds, and marine mammals, through the implementation and effective enforcement of conservation and management measures.  Those  
measures should include, as appropriate: 
 
(a) for sharks, the collection of species -specific data, fisheries bycatch 
mitigation measures, catch limits, and finning prohibitions; and   
 
(b) for marine turtles, seabirds, and marine mammals: fisheries bycatch mitigation measures, conservation and relevant management 
measures, prohibitions, and other measures in accordance with 
relevant international agreements to which the Party is party.  
 5. The Parties recognise that the implementation of a fisheries management system that is designed to prevent overfishing and overcapacity and to promote the recovery of overfished stocks must include the control, reduction, and eventual elimination of all subsidies that contribute to 
overfishing and overcapacity.  To that end, neither Party shall grant or 
maintain any of the following subsidies
12 within the meaning of Article 1.1 
of the SCM Agreement  that are specific within the meaning of Article 2 of 
the SCM Agreement : 
                                                            
11 These instruments include, among others, and as they may apply, United Nations Convention on 
the Law of the Sea  done at Montego Bay on  10 December 1982 (“UNCLOS”), the United Nations 
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks 
and Highly Migrat ory Fish Stocks , done at New York on 4 December 1995 (“UN Fish Stocks  
Agreement”), the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries , the 1993 FAO Agreement to 
Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels 
on the High Seas  done at Rome on  24 November 1993 (“Compliance Agreement”) and the 2001 IUU  
Fishing Plan of Action.  
12 For the purposes of this Article, a subsidy shall be attributable to the Party conferring it, regardless 
of the flag of the vessel involved  or the application of rules of origin to the fish involved.  
 
 (a) subsidies for fishing13 that negatively affect14 fish stocks that are in 
an overfished15 condition; and 
 
(b) subsidies provided to any fishing vessel16 while listed by the flag State 
or a relevant Regional Fisheries Management Organisation or 
Arrangement for IUU fishing in accordance with the rules and 
procedures of that organisation or arrangement and in conformity with international law.  
 6. Subsidy programmes that are established by a Party before the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party and which are inconsistent with paragraph 5(a)  shall  be brought into conformity with that paragraph as soon 
as possible and no later than three years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.  
 7. In relation to subsidies that are not prohibited by paragraph 5(a)  or 5(b) , and 
taking into consideration a Party’s social and developmental priorities, including food security concerns, each Party shall make best efforts to refrain from introducing new, or extending , or enhancing existing  subsidies within 
the meaning of Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement , to the extent they are 
specific within the meaning of Article 2 of the SCM Agreement , that 
contribute to overfishing or overcapacity.  
 8. With a view to achieving the objective of eliminating subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity, the Parties shall review the disciplines in paragraph 5 through existing  channels, as appropriate.  
 9. Each Party shall also provide, to the extent possible, information in relation to other fisheries subsidies that the Party grants or maintains that are not covered by paragraph 5, in particular fuel subsidies.  
 10. A Party may request information from the other Party regarding fisheries subsidies notifications provided in accordance with WTO  data reporting 
requirements.  The notifying Party shall respond to that request as quickly as 
possible and in a comprehensive manner. 
                                                            
13 For the purposes of this paragraph, “fishing” means searching for, attracting, locating, catching, 
taking , or harvesting fish , or any activity which can reasonably be expected to result in the attracting, 
locating, catching, taking or harvesting of fish.  
14 The negative effect of those subsidies shall be determined based on the best scientific evidence 
available . 
15 For the purposes of this Article, a fish stock is overfished if the stock is at su ch a low level that 
mortality from fishing needs to be restricted to allow the stock to rebuild to a level that produces maximum sustainable yield or alternative reference points based on the best scientific evidence available. Fish stocks that are recogni sed as overfished by the domestic jurisdiction where the fishing 
is taking place or by a relevant Regional Fisheries Management O rganisation shall also be  considered 
overfished for the purposes of this paragraph.  
16 The term “fishing vessels” refers to any vessel, ship or other type of boat used for, equipped to be 
used for, or intended to be used for fishing or fishing related activities.  
 
  
11. The Parties recognise the importance of concerted international action to address IUU fishing as reflected in regional and international instruments
17 
and shall endeavour to improve cooperation internationally in this regard, including with and through competent international organisations. 
 12. In support of efforts to combat IUU fishing practices and to help deter trade in products from species harvested from those practices, each Party shall:  
 
(a) cooperate with the other Party to identify nee ds and to build capacity 
to support the implementation of this Article;  
 
(b) support monitoring, control, surveillance, compliance , and 
enforcement systems, including by adopting, reviewing, or revising, as appropriate, measures  to: 
 
(i) deter vessels that  are flying its flag
18 and its nationals from 
engaging in IUU fishing activities; and  
 
(ii) address the transhipment at sea of fish or fish products caught through IUU fishing activities; and  
 
(c) implement  port State measures, including through actions co nsistent 
with the Port State Measures Agreement ;
19 
 
(d) strive to act consistently with relevant conservation and management measures adopted by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations 
of which it is not a member so as not to undermine those measures; and 
 
(e) endeavour not to undermine catch or trade documentation schemes operated by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations or Arrangeme nts or an intergovernmental organisation whose scope 
includes the management of shared fisheries resources, including straddling and highly migratory species, where that Party is not a member of those organisations or arrangements. 
                                                            
17 Regional and international instruments include, among others, and as they may apply, the 2001 
IUU Fishing Plan of Action, the 2005 Rome Declaration on IUU Fishing  adopted in Rome on 12 
March 2005, the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, 
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing  done at Rome on  22 November 2009, as well as instruments 
establishing and adopted by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations , which are defined as 
intergovernmental fisheries organisations or arrangements, as appropriate, that have the competence to establish conservation and management measures.  
18 For the purposes of this paragraph, for the United Kingdom, “vessels that are flying its flag” is to 
be understood to mean vessels that are both flying the United Kingdom flag and registered on the United Kingdom register of British ships.  
19 Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported, and 
Unregulated Fishing done at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  at Rome 
on 22 November 2009 (“Port State Measures Agreement”).  
 
  
13. Consistent with Article  28.2 (Publication  – Transparency and Anti -
Corruption ), a Party shall, to the extent possible, provide the other Part y with 
the opportunity to comment on proposed measures that are designed to 
prevent trade in fisheries products that result from IUU fishing.  
  
Article 22.13  
Sustainable Forest Management and Trade  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of conservation and sustainable forest management, including in relation to addressing climate change and reducing biodiversity loss, and the role of trade in pursuing this objective.  The Parties 
acknowledge their role  as major consumers, producers, and traders of forest 
products and the importance of the forest sector to the development and livelihood of communities and indigenous peoples. 
 2. The Parties recognise the importance of:  
 
(a) the sustainable management of  forests for providing environmental, 
economic, and social benefits for present and future generations; 
 
(b) halting deforestation and forest degradation, including with respect to trade in commodities related to those activities;  
 
(c) trade in forest pro ducts harvested from sustainably managed forests 
and in accordance with the law of the country of harvest; and 
 
(d) taking measures that contribute to combatting illegal logging and 
related trade and to promoting trade in legally harvested forest products. 
 3. Accordingly, each Party shall take measures to combat illegal logging and 
related trade.  
 4. The Parties recognise that some forest products, when sourced from sustainably managed forests and used appropriately, can store carbon and avoid greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors and thus contribute toward achieving global environmental objectives. 
 5.  Each Party shall:  
 
(a) cooperate and exchange information, as appropriate, on the implementation of measures that contribute to combatting illegal 
logging and related trade, including with respect to third countries; 
and  
 
 (b) cooperate bilaterally and in multilateral fora, as appropriate, on 
opportunities to halt deforestation and forest degradation, and the 
trade in commodities related  to those activities, to reduce biodiversity 
loss, and to address other sustainable forest management and trade matters.  
  
Article 22.14  
Trade and Biodiversity  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, including ma rine biodiversity, and their key role in achieving 
sustainable development.  
 2. Accordingly, each Party shall promote and encourage the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, in accordance with its law  and policy. 
 3. The Parties recognise the importance of respecting, preserving, and 
maintaining knowledge and practices of i ndigenous and local communities 
embodying traditional lifestyles that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.  
 4. The Partie s recognise the importance of facilitating access to genetic 
resources within their respective  domestic  jurisdictions, consistent with each 
Party’s international obligations.  The Parties further recognise that each 
Party may require, through domestic measures, prior informed consent to 
access those genetic resources in accordance with domestic measures and, 
where such access is granted, the establishment of mutually agreed terms, including with respect to sharing of benefits from the use of those genet ic 
resources, between users and providers.  
 5. The Parties also recognise the importance of public participation and consultation, in accordance with their respective law and policy, in the development and implementation of  measures concerning the conserva tion 
and sustainable use of biological diversity.  Each Party shall make publicly 
available information, about its programmes and activities, including cooperative programmes, related to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. 
 6. Consistent with Article 22.20 (Cooperation Frameworks) , the Parties shall 
cooperate on matters of mutual interest.  Cooperation may include  
exchanging information and experiences in areas related to:  
 
(a) the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity; 
 
(b) the protection and maintenance of ecosystems and ecosystem services, including marine ecosystems;  
 
 (c) access to genetic resources and the sharing of benefits arising from 
their utilisation; 
(d) embedding biodiversity considerations into policies, strategies, and 
practices of public and private actors in relevant sectors; and  
 
(e) safeguarding wild and managed pollinators , and promoting the 
sustainable use of pollination services.  
  
Artic le 22.15  
Invasive Alien Species  
 
1. The Parties recognise that  the movement of terrestrial and aquatic invasive 
alien species across borders through trade- related pathways can adversely 
affect the environment, economic activities and development, and plant, animal , and human health.  The Parties also recognise that the prevention, 
surveillance, detection, control , and, when possible, eradication, of invasive 
alien species are critical strategies for managing those adverse impacts.  
 2. Accordingly, the Parties shall identify cooperative opportunities to share informat ion and management experiences on the movement, prevention, 
detection, control , and eradication of invasive alien species, with a view to 
enhancing efforts to assess and address the risks and adverse impacts of invasive alien species.  
  
Article 22.16  
Conservation and Illegal Wildlife Trade 
 
1. The Parties affirm the importance of combating the illegal take
20 of, and 
illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, and acknowledge that this trade undermines efforts to conserve and sustainably manage those natural  
resources, has social consequences, distorts legal trade in wild fauna and flora, and reduces the economic and environmental value of these natural resources.  
 2. Accordingly, the Parties affirm their commitment to implement the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora done at Washington D.C. on 3 March 1973 (“CITES”).
21  
 3. The Parties commit to promote conservation and to combat the illegal take 
of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora.  To that end, the Parties shall:  
 
                                                            
20 The term “take” here mean s captured, killed , or collected and , with respect to a plant, also means 
harvested, cut, logged or removed.  
21 For the purposes of this Article, a Party’s CITES obligations include existing  and future 
amendments to which it is a Party and any existing  and future  reservations, exemptions, and 
exceptions applicable to it.  
 
 (a) exchange information and experiences on issues of mutual interest 
related to combating the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, including combating illegal logging and associated illegal 
trade, and promoting the legal trade in associated products;   
 
(b) undertake, as appropriate, joint activities on conservation issues of mutual interest, including through relevant regional  and international 
fora; and  
 
(c) endeavour to implement, as appropriate, CITES resolutions that aim to protect and conserve species whose survival is threatened by international trade.  
 4. Each Party further commits to:  
 
(a) take appropriate measures to protect and conserve wild fauna and 
flora that it has identified to be at risk within its territory , including 
measures to conserve the ecological integrity of specially protected 
natural areas, for example wetlands;   
 
(b) maintain or strengthen government capacity and institutional frameworks to promote sustainable forest management and wild fauna and flora conservation, and endeavour to enhance public participation and transparency in these institutional frameworks; and  
 
(c) endeavour to develop and strengthen cooperation and consultation 
with interested non- governmental entities in order to enhance 
implementation of measures to combat the illegal take of, and illegal 
trade in, wild fauna and flora. 
 5. In a further effort to address the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, including parts and products thereof, each Party shall take measures to combat, and cooperate to prevent, the trade of wild fauna and 
flora that, based on credible evidence
22, were taken or traded in violation of 
that Party’s laws and regulations, the primary purpose of which is to conserve, protect, or manage wild fauna or flora.  Such measures shall include 
sanctions, penalties, or other effective measures , incl uding administrative 
measures, that can act as a deterrent to such trade.  In addition, each Party shall endeavour to take measures to combat the trade of wild fauna and flora transhipped through its territory  that, based on credible evidence, were 
illegal ly taken or traded. 
 6. The Parties recognise that each Party retains the right to exercise administrative, investigatory, and enforcement discretion in its 
implementation of paragraph 5, including by taking into account in relation 
to each situation the s trength of the available evidence and the seriousness of 
                                                            
22 For the purposes of this paragraph, each Party retains the right to determine what constitutes 
“credible evidence”.  
 
 the suspected violation.  In addition, the Parties recognise that in 
implementing paragraph 5, each Party  retains the right to make decisions 
regarding the allocation of administrative, investigatory , and enforcement 
resources.  
 7. In order to promote the widest measure of law enforcement cooperation and information sharing between the Parties to combat the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, the Parties shall endeavour to ide ntify 
opportunities, consistent with their respective laws and regulations , and in 
accordance with applicable international agreements, to enhance law enforcement cooperation and information sharing, for example by creating and participating in law enforce ment networks. 
 8. The Parties recognise the importance of continuing efforts to combat the illegal trade in wildlife, including ivory, and the importance of appropriate regulation of domestic wildlife markets worldwide, including markets for ivory and goods containing ivory, that are contributing to poaching or illegal trade.  Accordingly, the Parties shall cooperate as appropriate to support non-
party efforts to introduce and implement domestic controls on the take and trade in wildlife, and on markets for ivory and goods containing ivory, that are contributing to poaching or illegal trade.  
  
Article 22.17  
Corporate Social Responsibility  
 
Each Party should encourage enterprises operating within its territory  
or jurisdiction, to adopt voluntarily, into their policies and practices, principles of corporate social responsibility that are related to the environment, consistent with internationally recognised standards and guidelines that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party. 
  
Article 22.18  
Opportunities for Public Participation  
 
1. Each Party shall seek to accommodate requests for information regarding the Party’s implementation of this Chapter.  
 2. Each Party shall make use of existing , or establish new, consultative 
mechanisms, for example domestic advisory committees, to seek views on 
matters related to the implementation of this Chapter.  These mechanisms may include persons with relevant experience, as appropriate, including 
experie nce in business, natural resource conservation and management, or 
other environmental matters.  
 
 Article 22.19  
Public Submissions  
 
1. Each Party shall provide for the receipt and consideration of written 
submissions from persons of that Party regarding its implementation of this 
Chapter in accordance with its domestic procedures.  Each Party shall make 
readily accessible and publicly available its procedures for the receipt and consideration of written submissions.  
 2. A Party may provide in its procedures that a submission should: 
 
(a) raise an issue directly relevant to this Chapter;  
 
(b) clearly identify the person or organisation making the submission; 
and 
 
(c) explain, to the degree possible, how and to what extent the issue raised affects trade or investment between the Parties.  
 3. Each Party shall consider matters raised by the submission and provide a timely response to the submitter, including in writing as appropriate.  
  
Article 22.20  
Cooperation Frameworks  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation as a mechanism to implement this Chapter, to enhance its benefits and to strengthen the Parties’ joint and individual capacities to protect the environment and to promote sustainable development and clean  growth as they strengthen their trade and 
investment relations.   
 2. Accordingly, the Parties shall cooperate as appropriate on the matters identified in this Chapter.  Such cooperation may take place bilaterally and 
in international fora.  
 3. Each Part y may:  
 
(a) share its priorities for cooperation with the other Party, including the objectives of that cooperation;  
 
(b) propose cooperation activities related to the implementation of this Chapter; and  
 
(c) develop and participate in cooperation activities and programmes as agreed by the Parties.  
 
 4. Cooperation may be undertaken through various means including: dialogue , 
workshops, seminars, conferences, collaborative programmes , and projects; 
technical assistance to promote and facilitate cooper ation and training, the 
sharing of information, data , and evidence based practices on policies and 
procedures; and the exchange of experts.  
 
5. Each Party may promote public participation in the development and implementation of cooperative activities, as  appropriate.  
 6. All cooperative activities under this Chapter are subject to the availability of funds and of human and other resources, and to the applicable laws and regulations of the Parties.   The Parties shall decide, on a case-by- case basis, 
the fu nding of cooperative activities. 
 
 
Article 22.21  
Environment Working Group 
 
1.
 The Parties hereby establish an Environment Working Group (“the Working 
Group” ) composed of official level representatives, as designated by each 
Party.   
2. The Working Group shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force 
of this Agreement . Thereafter, the Working Group shall meet at least every 
two years, unless the Parties decide otherwise.  
3. The purpose of the Working Group is to oversee the implementation of this 
Chapter and its functions shall be to:  
(a) review and monitor the implementation and operation of the provisions of this Chapter;  
(b) provide a forum to seek solutions to resolve differences between the Parties as to the interpretation or application of this Chapter;  
(d)
 coordinate with other committees, working groups , and any other 
subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement as appropriate; 
(e) perform any other functions as the Parties may decide.  
4. T he Working Group shall be jointly chaired and shall produce an agreed 
record of its meetings, including decisions and next steps and, as appropriate, report to the Joint Committee.  
 
 Article 22.22   
Environment Contact Points  
 
Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point from its relevant 
authorities within 90 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement in 
order to facilitate communication between the Parties in the implementation 
of this Chapter.  Each Party shall promptly notify the other Part y in the event 
of any change to its contact point. 
 
Article 22.23   
Environment Consultations  
 
1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this Chapter , and shall make ev ery effort through dialogue, 
consultation, exchange of information and, if appropriate, cooperation to 
address any matter that might affect the operation of this Chapter.  
 2.
 A Party (the requesting Party) may request consultations with the other Party 
(the responding Party) regarding any matter arising under this Chapter by 
delivering a written request to the responding Party’s contact point.  The requesting Party shall includ e information that is specific and sufficient to 
enable the responding Party to respond, including identification of the matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the request.   
 3.
 Before a Party requests consultations under this Article fo r a matter arising 
under paragraph 4 or paragraph 6 of Article 22.3 (General Commitments), 
that Party shall consider whether it maintains environmental laws that are substantially equivalent in scope to the environmental laws that would be the subject of the dispute and shall identify and notify those laws to the 
responding Party. The Parties shall take this issue into account during the 
consultations.  
 4.
 Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they shall enter into consultations promptly, and no later than 30 days after the date of receipt by the responding 
Party of the request. 
 
5.
 The Parties shall make every effort to arrive at a mutually agreed solution to the matter, which may include appropriate cooperative activities.  The Parties may seek advice or assistance from any person or body they deem appropriate 
in order to examine the matter.  
 
6. 
 Consultations pursuant to this Article, Article 22.24 (Joint Committee Consultations) and Article 22.25 (Ministerial Consultations) may be held in person or by any technological means available as agreed by the Parties.  
 
 7. Consultations pursuant to this Article, Article 22.24 (Joint Committee 
Consultations) and Article 22.25 (Ministerial Consultations), and in particular, positions taken by the Parties during consultations, shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further or other proceedings.  
 
 
Article 22.24  
Joint Committee Consultations  
 
1.
 If the Parties have failed to resolve the matter under Article 22.23 
(Environment Consultations), either Party may request that the Joint 
Committee convene to consider the matter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party.  
 2.
 The Joint Committee shall promptly convene following the delivery of the 
request, and shall seek to resolve the matter including, if appropriate, by 
gathering relevant scientific and technical information from governmental or 
non-governmental experts. 
 
 
Article 22.25  
Ministerial Consultations  
 
  If the Parties have failed to resolve the matter under Article 22.24 
(Joint Committee Consultations), either Party may refer the matter to the relevant Ministers of the Parties by delivering a written request to the contact 
point of the other Party. The re levant Ministers shall seek to resolve the 
matter.  
 
 
Article 22.26  
Dispute Resolution  
 
1.
 If the Parties have failed to resolve the matter under Article 22.23 (Environment Consultations), Article 22.24 (Joint Committee Consultations) and Article 22.25 (Ministerial Consultations), within 120 days after the date 
of receipt of a request under Article 22.23 (Environment Consultations), or any other period as the Parties may agree , the requesting Party  may request 
consultations under Article 30.7 (Consultations – Dispute Settlement) or  
request the establishment of a panel under Article 30.8 (Request for 
Establishment of a Panel – Dispute Settlement).  
 
2.
 In addition to the requirements set out in subparagraph 1(a) of Article 30.10 
(Qualification of  Panellists), for a dispute arising under this Chapter  
 
 panellists other than the chair shall have sufficient expertise or experience in 
environmental law or practice.22A1 
 
 ANNEX 22.A  
 
For Australia, the Ozone Protection and Synthetic Greenhouse Gas 
Management Act 1989. 
For the United Kingdom, Regulation (EC) 1005/2009 as it applies in Great 
Britain as retained EU law and as it applies in Northern Ireland directly, and 
Regulation (EU) 517/2014 as it applies in Great Britain as retained EU law, 
and as it applies in Northern Ireland directly. As amended by The Ozone -
Depleting Substances and Fluorinated Greenhouse Gases (Amendment Act) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 and 2020.22B-1 
 
 ANNEX 22.B  
 
For Australia, the Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) 
Act 1983 and the Navigation Act 2012. 
For the United Kingdom, the Merchant Shipping Act 1995 and regulations 
made under the Act.  CHAPTER 23 
 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
Article 23.1 
General Provisions 
 1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of development in promoting inclusive economic growth, as well as the instrumental role that trade and investment can play in contributing to economic development and prosperity.  Inclusive economic growth includes a more broad- based distribution of the 
benefits of economic growth through the expansion of business and industry, the creat ion of jobs, and the alleviation of poverty. 
 2. The Parties acknowledge that effective domestic coordination of trade, investment, and development policies can contribute to  inclusive economic 
growth for developing countries.   
 3. The Parties affirm the importance of increased participation of developing countries in the global economy and recognise the vital contribution of the World Trade Organization to trade and development.   
  
Article 23.2 
Joint Development Activities  
 1. The Parties recognise the value in undertaking joint development activities relating to trade and investment, which may include: 
 
(a)  an exchange of information between the Parties, relating to experience, cooperation, best practice, technical assistance, or capacity building; 
 
(b)  mutually agreed cooperation, technical assistance, or capacity building on issues such as customs procedures, trade facilitation, technical barriers to trade, trade in services, or digital trade;  
 
(c)  mutually agreed cooperation in international fora; 
 
(d)  inviting, as appropriate, the assistance of relevant international institutions, private sector entities, non- governmental organisations, 
or other institutions; or  
 
(e)  an exchange of views on methodologies  for monitoring the 
implementation and operation of this Chapter.  
 2. Each Party may monitor and assess the role this Agreement  plays in relation 
to development, subject to its laws, regulations, policies, and practices. 
 
 
Article 23.3 
Committee on Cooperation  
  The Committee on Cooperation established under Article 27.4 (Committee 
on Cooperation - Cooperation) shall consider any matter under this Chapter related 
to cooperation and support  any activit ies pursuant to Article 23 .2 (Joint Development 
Activities).  
  
 Article 23.4 
Non-Application  of Dispute Settlement  
  Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 30 
(Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  
 CHAPTER 24 
 
TRADE AND GENDER EQUALITY  
 
 
Article 24.1 
Objectives  
 1.  The Parties acknowledge the importance of advancing gender equality for inclusive economic growth and that gender -responsive policies are important 
for ensuring equitable participation in domestic, regional and global economies.  
 2.  Accordingly, the Parties recognise the importance of advancing  gender 
equality and women’ s economic empowerment across this Agreement  and 
agree to incorporate gender perspectives in their trade and investment 
relationship.  
 3.  The Parties affirm their commitment to the WTO Joint Ministerial 
Declaration on Trade and Women’s Economic Empowerment made at the 11
th WTO Ministerial Conference in Buenos Aires in December 2017 and 
acknowledge the work of other multilateral fora, such as the  Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development , in advancing the evidence  base 
on women’s economic empowerment and trade. 
 4.  The Parties acknowledge that, in addition to the provisions in this Chapter, there are provisions in other Chapters of this Agreement that seek to advance gender equality and women’s economic empowerment in the context of trade and investment  including in relation to services, SMEs , financial services, 
procurement, labour, and digital trade . 
 5.  The Parties recognise the importance of evidence-based interventions and 
measures that facilitate  women’s full access to and ability to benefit from this 
Agreement . 
 6.  The Parties further recognise the benefits of sharing their experiences in designing, implementing, resourcing and strengthening policies, programmes 
and other initiatives to  advance gender equality and address the systemic and 
other barriers which prevent women, including as workers, business owners 
and entrepreneurs, from participating equitably in all aspects of trade.  
 Article 24.2 
Trade and Gender Equality Cooperation Activities  
 
1.  T he Parties shall undertake cooperation activities, as appropriate , that support  
women workers, business owners and entrepreneurs to access the full benefits and opportunities created by this A greement .  
 2.  The Parties recognise the importance of carrying out the cooperation activities with the inclusive participation of women.  
  3.  Cooperation activities that may be undertaken by the Parties include, but are not limited to, exchanging information, experiences and evidence relating to:  
 
(a)  programmes and initiatives aimed at improving the access of women to markets,  technology and financing;   
 
(b)  promoting equal opportunities for women in the workplace, including workplace flexibility ; 
 
(c)  the development and strengthening of women's leadership and business networks;  
 
(d)  improving the access of women and girls to leadership opportunities and education, including in fields in which they are under -
represented, such as science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, insofar as those activities are related to trade;  
  (e)  trade missions for businesswomen and women entrepreneurs;   
 
(f)  collaborating, including with developing countries and in multilateral fora, to promote equitable participation of women in supply chains; and  
 
(g) enabling women’s access to online business tools  and opportunities 
to strengthen digital skills , and identifying and addressing barriers to 
women accessing digital trade.  
 4.  To support achievement of the objectives of this Chapter, the Parties shall cooperate and exchange information on the integration of gender in 
approaches to data collection, analysis and monitoring, as agreed by the 
Parties, which may include: 
 
(a)  methods and procedures for the collection of sex- disaggregated data, 
the use of indicators, monitoring and evaluation methodologies, and the analysis of gender statistics related to trade;  
 
(b)  conducting gender analyses  of trade policies, incorporating both 
quantitative and qualitative data  and information, and for the  
 monitoring of their effects on women as workers, entrepreneurs and 
business-owners; or  
 
(c)  undertaking research on trade and gender equality where appropriate . 
  
Article 24.3 
Dialogue on Trade and Gender Equality  
 
1.  The Parties agree to establish a Dialogue on Trade and Gender Equality  (the 
Dialogue) composed of government representatives from each Party.  
Meetings of the Dialogue shall take place by agreement of the Parties.  
  2.  The Dialogue may consider any matter that the Parties consider appropriate 
to advance gender equality and women’s economic empowerment in the Parties’ trade and investment relationship.   The Committee on Cooperation 
shall consider any matter under this Chapter  related to cooperation and 
support any cooperation activities.  
  3.  The Dialogue may engage and facilitate communication with relevant stakeholders which may include women workers, business owners and entrepreneurs, in its consideration of matters releva nt to this Chapter.  
  4.  The Dialogue shall report on the progress of its work to the Committee on Cooperation established under paragraph 1 of Article 27.4 ( Committee on 
Cooperation – Cooperation), while seeking to avoid duplication of its work.  
 5.  The Dialogue may work with other bodies and subsidiary bodies established 
under this Agreement to advance the objectives of this Chapter and support the delivery of the cooperative activities described in Article 24.2 ( Trade and 
Gender Equality Cooperation Activities ), which may include providing 
advice or recommendations to the Joint Committee as appropriate.  
 
 
Article 24.4 
Non-application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  
 CHAPTER 25 
 
ANIMAL WELFARE AND ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE  
 
 
Article 25.1 
Animal Welfare  
 
1. The Parties recognise that animals are sentient beings.  They also recognise 
the connection between improved welfare of farmed animals and sustainable 
food production systems.  
 2. The Parties affirm the right of each Party to establish its own policies and priorities for the protection of animal welfare and to adopt or modify its laws, regulations a nd policies in this area.  
 3. Each Party recognises that it is inappropriate to encourage bilateral trade or investment by weakening or reducing its levels of protection for animal welfare.  Accordingly, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that it does not 
waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from, its laws, regulations and policies in a manner that weakens or reduces its level of animal welfare protection  as an encouragement for trade or 
investment between the Parties.  
 4. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that its laws, regulations and policies provide for and encourage high levels of animal welfare protection and shall endeavour to continue to improve their respective levels of animal welfare protection, including through their laws, regulations and policies. 
 5. The Parties shall  exchange information, expertise and experiences in areas of 
mutual interest in the field of animal welfare, with the aim o f improving 
understanding of each other’s approaches and regulatory systems and improving animal welfare standards. 
 6. The Parties shall continue to strengthen and build on their existing cooperation in the field of animal welfare , including on issues rel ating to the 
treatment of farmed animals, including by: 
 (a) encouraging cooperation on research in the field of animal welfare;  
and 
 (b) working together in relevant international fora on areas of mutual interest, including to promote the development of the best possible animal welfare standards and  practices for animals farmed for food 
production.  
 7.  The Parties encourage non -governmental bodies and persons of the Parties to 
exchange views, experiences and information as part of wider collaboration 
in the field of animal welfare.  
 
8.  The Parties hereby establish a Joint Working Group on Animal Welfare drawn from government representative s of the Parties responsible for animal 
welfare matters.  
 9. The J oint Working Group will, among other things , provide a forum for: 
 
(a) cooperation on initiatives of mutual interest; 
 (b) reviewing developments in animal welfare;  
 (c) promoting high animal welfare practices; and  
 (d) information sharing, under this Chapter. 
 10. The Joint Working Group shall have its first meeting within one year of the entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter at regular intervals as agreed by the Parties.  
  
Article 25.2 
Antimicrobial R esistance 
 
1. The Parties recognise that antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a serious global 
threat to human and animal health. 
 2. The Parties recognise that the nature of the threat requires a transnational and One Health approach, in line with the Global Action Plan, acknowledging the interdependencies between animal health, human health, and the environment, and the implications for food safety and food security.  
 3. Each Party shall explore initiatives to promote the reduced need for and appropriate use of antimicrobial agents in animal production and health , and  
in crop production, including promoting guidance on the prudent and 
responsible use of antimicrobial agents in good husbandry and veterinary practices, and biosecurity. 
 4. The Parties shall cooperate, on areas of mutual interest  in relevant 
international organisations, including the World Organisation for Animal Health , the United Nations Food and Agriculture  Organization , and the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission, on the further development of international codes, guidelines, standards, recommendations and other international initiatives aiming to promote the prudent and responsible use of antimicrobial agents, including those which are critically important for human medicine.  Each Party shall support the implementation of such agreed  
 international codes, guidelines, standards, recommendations and 
international initiatives.   
 5. The Parties recognise and support efforts made towards global harmonisation 
of surveillance and data collection.  Each Party shall promote strengthened 
AMR surveillance and monitoring of antimicrobial use under a One Health approach and may exchange its  experience in doing so with the othe r Party.  
 6. The Parties shall facilitate the exchange of information, expertise, and experiences in the field of combatting antimicrobial resistance, and identify common views, interests, priorities, and policies in this area. 
 7. The Committee on Cooperation established under Article 27.4 (Committee 
on Cooperation - Cooperation) shall consider any matter under this Article 
related to cooperation and support any cooperation activities. 
  
Article 25.3 
Non-application of D ispute S ettlement  
 
  Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under 
Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter. CHAPTER 26 
GOOD REGULATORY PRACTICE 
Article 26.1 
Definitions 
For
 the purposes of this Chapter: 
“r
egulatory authority”  means:  
(a) f
or Australia, Australian Government departments at the central level
of government listed under relevant administrative arrangements
orders, excluding where  those  departments are regulating human
health;
(b) f
or the United Kingdom, a ministerial department of the central level
of government; and
“regu
latory measure” means:  
(a) f
or Australia: Acts and legislative instruments  made under an Act of
the Commonwealth Parliament related to any matter covered by thisAgreement and for which a regulatory impact statement is requiredunder relevant rules and procedures;
(b)
for the United Kingdom:
(i) an
 Act of the UK Parliament; or
(ii) a
 statutory instrument made , by a Minister of the Crown,
under an Act of the UK Parliament;
rela
ted to any matter covered by this Agreement and in relation  to a 
business activity, excluding: 
(A) a
ny measure imposing, abolishing or varying any tax,
duty, l
evy or other charge (or any measure in
connection with that measure);
(B) a
ny measure in connection with public sector
procurement;
(C) a
ny measure in connection with the giving of grants or
other financial assistance by or on behalf of a publicauthority; or  
 (D) any measure which is to have effect for a period of less 
than 12 months.  
  
Article 26.2 
General Provisions 
 1. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote good regulatory practices in the process of planning, designing, issuing, implementing, and reviewing 
regulatory measures to facilitate achievement of domestic policy objectives 
and regulatory cooperation between the Parties with the aim of enhancing bilateral trade and investment, as well as economic growth and employment, 
by promoting: 
 
(a) an effective, transparent , and predictable regulatory environment; 
 (b) compatible regulatory approaches and reducing unnecessarily burdensome, duplicative, or divergent re gulatory requirements;  
 (c)  the exchange of information on regulatory measures, practices , or 
approaches of the Parties, including how to enhance their efficient application ; and 
 (d) bilateral cooperation between the Parties in international fora.   
 2. Each Party shall be free to determine its approach to good regulatory practices and regulatory cooperation under this Agreement in a manner consistent with its own legal framework, practice and fundamental principles underlying its regulatory system.  
  3. Provisions of this  Chapter shall not be construed so as to require a Party to: 
 (a) deviate from domestic procedures for identifying its regulatory priorities and preparing and adopting regulatory measures ensuring the levels of protection that the Party considers appropriate to achieve 
its public policy objectives (including health, safety, and environmental goals);  
 (b) take actions that would undermine or impede the timely adoption of regulatory measures to achieve its public policy objectives or preve nt 
a party from implementing regulatory measures in urgent or unforeseen circumstances; or  
 
(c) achieve any particular regulatory outcome.  
 Article 26.3 
Internal Coordination and Review Processes or Mechanisms  
 
Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that it has processes or 
mechanisms to facilitate effective internal coordination and review with 
respect to regulatory measures its regulatory authorities are preparing.  
  
Article 26.4 
Descriptions of Regulatory Processes and Mechanisms  
 
Each Party shall ensure that descriptions of the processes and 
mechanisms employed by its regulatory authorities in undertaking regulatory impact assessments, and other relevant good regulatory practices it deems appropriate, are freely and publicly available online.  
  
Article 26.5 
Impact Assessment  
 1. Each Party shall endeavour to systematically carry out, in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures, a regulatory  impact assessment of major 
regulatory measures
1 under preparation.  Regulatory impact assessments may 
encompass a range of procedures to determine possible impacts.  
 2. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that regulatory impact assessments it conducts: 
 
(a)  assess the need for the major regulatory measure, including the nature 
and the significance of the problem or issue that the regulatory measure intends to address;  
 
(b) examine feasible and appropriate regulatory or non- regulatory 
alternatives, including the option of not regulating, if available, that would achieve the Party’s public policy objectives; and 
 
(c) rely on reasonably obtainable existing information including relevant 
scientific, technical, economic or other information, within the boundaries of the authorities, mandates and resources of the particular regulatory authority. 
 3. When carrying out a regulatory impact assessment in accordance with  
                                                            
1 The regulatory authority of each Party may determine what constitutes a "major" regulatory measure 
for the purpose s of its obligations under this Chapter.  
 paragraph 1, each Party should consider, to the extent possible and relevant, 
the potential impact of the proposed major regulatory measure on SMEs.2 
 
4. Each Party shall, where possible and in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures, publish the findings of its regulatory impact assessments in a 
timely manner.  Each Party is encouraged to explain the grounds for concluding that the selected option achieves its public policy objectives in an efficient manner, including, if appropriate, reference to the costs  and benefits , 
and the potential for managing risks. 
  
Article 26.6 
Public Consultation 
 1. When preparing a proposed major regulatory measure, each Party shall 
endeavour to, in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures: 
 
(a) publish sufficient information concerning the proposed regulatory measure to allow interested person s to assess their interests in 
connection to the measure; 
 
(b) allow interested persons
3 a reasonable opportunity, including 
adequate time, to consider the proposed regulatory measure and to provide comments;
4 and  
 
(c) consider the comments received.  
 2. Each Party is encouraged to make use of electronic means of communication and to make information related to public consultation freely and publicly available online, including information on how to provide comments.  
 3. Each Party is encouraged to publicly explain how the comments received have informed the proposed regulatory measure. 
 
     
                                                            
2  For the United Kingdom, for the purpos es of this C hapter , “SMEs” means small and micro 
businesses.  
3  For greater certainty, this subparagraph does not prevent a Party from undertaking targeted 
consultations with interested parties under the conditions defined by its relevant rules and procedures.  
4  For greater certainty, this paragraph should be implemented consistently with each  Party’s  
obligations under other international agreements concerning human health , such as the WHO 
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control  done at Geneva on 16 June 2003 to 22 June 2003 and 
at New York on 30 June 2003 to 29 June 2004 .  
 Article 26.7 
Use of Plain Language 
 
Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that new regulatory measures 
are plainly written and are clear, concise, well organised, and easy to 
understand, recognising that some measures address technical issues and that relevant expertise may be needed to understand and apply them. 
  
Article 26.8 
Regulatory Register  
 
In accordance with its laws and regulations, each Party shall ensure 
that regulatory measures that are in effect are freely and publicly available 
online.  The website should allow searches for regulatory measures by citation or by word and be periodically updated. 
  
Article 26.9 
Retrospective Review  
 1. The Parties recognise the importance of maintaining processes or mechanisms to promote periodic retrospective reviews of major regulatory measures at intervals each Party deems appropriate.  
 2.  When conducting a retrospective review, each Party shall consider whether there are  opportunities to achieve its public policy objectives more effectively 
and reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens, including on SMEs. 
  
Article 26.10  
Regulatory Cooperation  
 1. The Parties shall cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter and to maximise the benefits arising from it, including those envisioned in 
paragraph 1 of Article  26.2 (General Provisions).  
 2. Each Party may propose a regulatory cooperation activity to the other Party through the contact points designated in accordance wi th Article 26.11 
(Contact Points) or through direct contact between the regulatory authorities. 
 3. Regulatory cooperation activities may include:  
 
(a) information exchange, dialogue , or meetings with the other Party, 
including in particular:  
 
(i) exchanging experiences with regulatory tools and instruments, including regulatory impact assessments, risk  
 assessments, retrospective reviews, and compliance with 
regulatory practices;  
 
(ii) exchanging information on planned or existing regulatory 
measur es to maximise the opportunity for common 
approaches; 
 
(b) information exchange s, dialogue s, or meetings with interested 
persons, including with SMEs, of the other Party;  
 
(c)  training programmes, seminars , and other relevant assistance;  
 
(d)  strengthening cooperation and other relevant activities between regulatory agencies; or 
 
(e) seeking to collaborate in relevant international fora.  
 4.  In accordance with its laws and regulations, each Party shall endeavour to encourage its relevant regul atory authorities to consider, where appropriate, 
regulatory measures in the other Party, as well as relevant developments in international, regional, and other fora when planning regulatory measures. 
  
Article 26.11  
Contact Points  
 1. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point on good regulatory practices to facilitate communication and cooperation between the Parties on 
any matter covered by this Chapter. 
 2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change to its contact point. 
 3. The contact points may assist any other c ommittee, working gr oup, 
subsidiary body, or contact point  established by this Agreement in 
considering matters of relevance to this Chapter.  
  
Article 26.12  
Relation to Other Chapters  
 
In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another 
Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.  
  
Article 26.13  
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
  
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for  any matter arising under this Ch apter.  
 CHAPTER 27 
 
COOPERATION 
 
 
Article 27.1 
General Provisions 
 1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of cooperation in implementing this Agreement and enhancing its benefits.   
 2. The Parties recognise that cooperation activities undertaken pursuant to this 
Agreement shall seek to complement and build upon existing agreements or arrangements between the Parties.   
  3. The Parties also recognise the importance of involving the private sector and non-governmental organisations in cooperation activities, where appropriate to 
do so.  
  
Article 27.2 
Areas of Cooperation  
 1. The Parties shall , consistent  with this Agreement, undertake and strengthen 
cooperation activities to assist in:  
 
(a) implementing this Agreement; 
 
(b) enhancing each Party’s ability to take advantage of the economic opportunities created by this Agreement; and 
 
(c) promoting and facilitating trade and investment between  the Parties.  
 2. Cooperation activities  may  include the  following areas:   
 
(a) environment; 
 
(b) trade and gender equality; 
 
(c) development; 
 
(d) labour; 
 
(e) anti-corruption; and 
 
(f) antimicrobial resistance . 
 3. The Parties may undertake cooperation activities through, inter alia : 
 
(a) dialogue, workshops, seminars, conferences, collaborative programs and 
projects;   
 
(b) the sharing of best practices on policies and procedures; and  
 
(c) the exchange of experts and information.  
 Article 27.3 
Contact Points  
 
 Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point on matters relating 
to the coordination of cooperation activities  in accordance with  Article 29.5 
(Contact Points  - Administrative and Institutional Provisions ).  
 
 
Article 27.4 
Committee on Cooperation  
 1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Cooperation, composed of government representatives of each Party.  
 2. The Committee shall :  
 
(a) review and monitor the implementation and operation of cooperation provisions in other Chapters of this Agreement related to areas of cooperation listed in Article 27.2 (Areas of Cooperation);  
 
(b) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties in cluding on  
experiences and lessons learned through cooperation activities undertaken between the Parties;  
 
(c) discuss and consider issues or proposals for future cooperation activities  
including, as appropriate , on analytical topics relating to monitoring, 
measurement, information gathering, and interpretation and analysis of information relevant to cooperation activities under this Agreement;  
 
(d) invite, as appropriate, private  sector entities, non -governmenta l 
organisations, civil society, relevant experts , stakeholders  or other 
relevant institutions, to assist in the development and implementation of cooperation activities ; 
 
(e) consider any matter, or matters raised by any standing working group or other subsidiary body including dialogues , related to areas of cooperation 
pursuant to Article 27.2 ( Areas of Cooperation); 
 
(f) coordinate with other committees, working groups and any other subsidiary body, including dialogues , established under this Agreement 
as appropriate, in support of the development and implementation of cooperation activities;  
 
(g) consider any matter related to cooperation and support any cooperation activities referred to it under any Chapter of this Agreement;  
 
(h) supervise the work of any committees, working groups or other subsidiary bodies including dialogues established under this Agreement, where the Agreement so provides; and  
 
(i) seek to resolve d ifferences that may arise concerning the interpretation 
or application of this Agreement in relation to areas of cooperation pursuant to Article 27.2 (Areas of Cooperation). 
 3. The Committee may:  
   (a) make recommendations, or refer matters , to the Joint  Committee;  
  (b) facilitate public -private partnerships in cooperation activities;  
 (c) establish ad hoc  working groups, as appropriate, which may include 
government representatives, non-government representatives or both; 
 
(d) refer matters to any ad hoc  or standing working group or any other  
subsidiary body including dialogues related to areas of cooperation 
pursuant to Article 27.2 (Areas of Cooperation) ; and  
 
 (e) engage in other activities as the Parties may decide.  
 4. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as agreed by the Parties.  
 5. The Committee shall produce an agreed record of its meetings, including decisions and next steps and, as appropriate, report to the Joint Committee . 
  
Article 27.5 
Resources  
 1. Cooperation activities undertaken under this Chapter are subject to the availability of resources  and the applicable laws and regulations of each Party , 
and on request, and on terms and conditions agreed  between the Parties. 
 2. The Parties shall bear the costs of cooperation activities under this Chapter in an 
equitable manner to be agreed by the Parties.  
  
Article 27.6 
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
  
Without prejudice to matters arising under other Chapters of this 
Agreement , neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.  
 CHAPTER 28 
 
TRANSPARENCY AND ANTI -CORRUP TION  
 
 
Article 28.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
 
“act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the exercise of their official duties” includes any use of the public official’s or foreign public 
official’s position, whether or not within the official’s authorised competence;   “administ rative rulings of general application” means an administrative 
ruling or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall generally within the ambit of that administrative ruling or interpretation and that establishes a norm of conduct, but does not include:  
 
(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi -
judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good, or service of the other Party in a specific case; or  
 
(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice;  
 
“Anti -Bribery Convention” means the Convention on Combating Bribery of 
Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions  done at Paris 
on 17 December 1997;  “confiscation” means the permanent deprivation of p roperty by order of a 
court or other competent authority, and includes forfeiture, where applicable;  
 “foreign public official” means any natural person holding a legislative, executive, administrative, or judicial office of a foreign country, at any level of government, whether appointed or elected, whether permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that natural person’s seniority; and any natural person exercising a public function for a foreign country, at any level of government, including for a public agency or public enterprise;  
 “freezing” or “seizing ” means temporarily prohibiting the transfer, 
conversion, disposition, or movement of property , or temporarily assuming 
custody or control of property on the basis of an order issued by a court or other competent authority;  
 “official of a public international organisation” means an international civil 
servant or any person who is authorised by a public international organisation to act on its behalf;   “property” means assets of every  kind, whether corporeal or incorporeal, 
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and legal documents or instruments evidencing title to or interest in such assets;  
 “public official” means:  
 
(a)  any natural person holding a legislative, executive,  
administrative , or judicial office of a Party, whether appointed 
or elected, whether permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid, and irrespective of that natural person’s seniority;  
 
(b)  any other natural person who performs a public function for a Party, including for a public agency or public enterprise, or provides a public service, as defined under that Party’s law and as applied in the pertinent area of law in that Party; or  
 
(c)  any other natural person defined as a public official under a 
Party’s law ; and 
 
“UNCAC” means the  United Nations Convention against Corruption done 
at New York on 31 October 2003. 
  
Section A  
Transparency  
  
Article 28.2 
Publication  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures , and 
administrative rulings of general application with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published, including on the internet where feasible, or otherwise made available in a manner that enables interested persons and the other Party to become acquainted with them.  
 2. With respect to any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that a Party proposes to adopt, each Party shall, to the extent it considers appropriate:  
 
(a) publish in advance the proposed measure or information concerning the nature of the proposed measure; and 
 
(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measure or information.  
  
3.  To the extent possible, when introducing or changing the laws, regulations , 
or procedures referred to in paragraph 1, each Party shall endeavour to provide a reasonable period between the date when those laws, regulations , 
or procedures, proposed or final , in accordance with its  legal system, are 
made publicly available and the date when they enter into force.  
 4.  Each Party shall, with respect to a regulation of general application adopted by its central level of government respecting any matter covered by this Agreement that is published in accordance with paragraph 1:  
 
(a)  promptly publish the regulation on a single official website or in an official journal of national circulation; and  
 
(b)  if appropriate, include with the publication an explanation of the purpose of and rationale for the regulation.  
  
Article 28.3 
Administrative Proceedings  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general application with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement are administered in a consistent, impartial, and reasonable manner.  
 2. With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial, and reasonable 
manner the measures referred to in paragraph 1 with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement, each Party shall ensure in its administrative proceedings applying these  measures to a particular person, good , or service 
of the other Par ty in specific cases, that:  
 
(a)  whenever possible, a person of the other Party that is directly affected by a proceeding is provided with reasonable notice, in accordance with domestic procedures, of when a proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which the proceeding is initiated , and a 
general description of any issue in question;  
 
(b)  a person of the other Party that is directly affected by a proceeding is 
afforded a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of that person’s position prior to any final administrative action, when time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest 
permit; and  
 
(c)  it follows its domestic procedu res in accordance with its law s.  
 Article 28.4 
Review and Appeal1 
 
1.  Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi -judicial or 
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purpose of the prompt review and, if warranted, correction of a final administrative action with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement.  Those tribunals shall be impartial and 
independent of the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.  
 2.  Each Party shall ensure that, with respect to the tribunals or procedures referred to in paragraph 1, the parties to a proceeding are provided with the right to:  
 
(a)  a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and  
 
(b)  a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where required by its laws and regulations, the record compiled by the relevant authority.  
 3.  Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for in its domestic laws and regulations, that the decision referred to in paragraph 2(b) shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action at issue.  
  
Article 28.5 
Provision of Information  
 1.  If a Party considers that any proposed or actual measure may materially affect the operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the other Party’s interests under this Agreement, it shall, to the extent possible, inform the other Party of the proposed or actual measure.  
 2.  On request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide information and respond to questions pertaining to any proposed or actual measure that the requesting Party considers may affect the operati on of this Agreement, 
whether or not the requesting Party has been previously informed of that measure.  
 3.  A Party may convey any request or provide information under this Article to the other Party through their contact points.  
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, review need not include merits (de novo ) review, and may take the form of 
common law judicial review.   The correction of final administrative actions may include a referral 
back to the body that took that action.  
  
4.  Any information provided under this Article shall be without prejudice as to whether the measure in question is consistent with this Agreement.  
  
Article 28.6 
Accessible and Open Government  
 
To the extent possible, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that 
information published by its central level of government with respect to any 
matter covered by this Agreement is accessible in open, machine -readable 
formats.  
  
Section B  
Anti -Corruption 
 
Article 28.7 
Scope  
 
This Section applies to measures to prevent and combat bribery and 
corruption relating to any matter covered by the Agreement. 
  
Article 28.8 
General Provisions 
 1. Each Party affirms its resolve to prevent and combat bribery and corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment.   
 2.  Each Party recognises the important role that both the public and private sectors have in preventing and combatting bribery and corruption.   
 3. Each Party recognises the importance of regional and multilateral initiatives to prevent and combat bribery and corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment, including the United Nations, the Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development, the World Trade 
Organization, the Financial Action Task Force, and the G20, and recognises 
the importance of working jointly with the other Party to encourage and 
support appropriate initiatives to prevent and combat such bribery and corruption. 
 4. The Parties recognise that their respective competent anti -corruption 
authorities have established working relationships in many bilateral and 
multilateral forums and that cooperation under this Agreement can enhance the Parties’ joint efforts in those forums and help produce outcomes that prevent and combat bribery and corruption in matters affecting i nternational 
trade or investment.  
  
5. Each Party affirms its adherence to the Anti -Bribery Convention and the 
UNCAC.   
 6.  The Parties recognise that the description of offences adopted or maintained in accordance with this Section, and of the applicable l egal defences or legal 
principles controlling the lawfulness of conduct, is reserved to each Party’s law, and that those offences shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with each Party’s law.  
  
Article 28.9 
Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and Corruption 
 1.  Each Party shall adopt or maintain legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences under its law , in matters affecting 
international trade or investment, when committed intentionally, by any person s ubject to its jurisdiction:  
 
(a)  the promise, offering or giving to a public official, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage, for the official or another person or entity, in order that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the pe rformance of or the exercise of their official duties;  
 
(b)  the solicitation or acceptance by a public official, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage, for the official or another person or entity, in order that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the exercise of their official duties;  
 
(c)  the promise, offering or giving to a foreign public official or an official of a public international organisation, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage ,
2 for the official or another person or entity, in 
order that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the exercise of their official duties, in order to obtain or retain business or other undue advantage in relation to the conduct of international business; and  
 
(d) the aiding or abetting, or conspiracy in, the commission of any of the offen ces described in subparagraphs (a) through (c). 
 2.  Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures as may be necessary, in accordance with  its laws and regulations, regarding the maintenance of books 
and records, financial statement disclosures, and accounting and auditing standards, to prohibit the following acts carried out for the purpose of committing any of the offences described in paragraph 1: 
                                                            
2 For greater certainty, a Party may provide in its law that it is not an offence if the advantage was 
permitted or required by the written laws or regulations of a foreign public official’s country, 
including case law.  The Parties confirm that they are not endorsing those written laws or regulations.  
  
(a)  the establishment of off -the-books accounts;  
 
(b)  the making of off-the-books or inadequately identified transactions;  
 
(c)  the recording of non- existent expenditure;  
 
(d)  the entry of liabilities with incorrect identification of their objects;  
 
(e)  the use of false documents; and  
 
(f)  the intentional destruction of bookkeeping documents earlier than 
foreseen by the law.  
 3. Each Party shall make the commission of an offence described in paragraph s 
1 or 2 liable to sanctions that take into account the gravity of that offence. 
 4.  Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures as may be necessary, consistent with its legal principles, to establish the liability of legal persons for offences described in parag raphs 1 or 2.  In particular, each Party shall ensure that 
legal persons held liable for offences described in paragraph s 1 or 2 are 
subject to effective, proportionate , and dissuasive criminal or non- criminal 
sanctions, which include monetary sanctions.  
 5. Each Party shall disallow the tax deductibility of bribes and other expenses considered illegal by the Party incurred in furtherance of the commission of an offence described in paragraph 1. 
 6. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures in accordance with its law that permit it to impose visa restrictions, such as refusal, cancellation or curtailment, or other immigration controls, on any foreign public official who 
engaged in the commission of an offence described in paragraph 1.
3  A Party 
may also adopt or maintain such measures in respect of : 
 
(a) the spouses, civil partners, unmarried partners, children, and dependent household members of the foreign public official; and 
 
(b) any person that assisted or encouraged such offences, or any person that attempted to engage in such activities. 
 7. The Parties recognise the harmful effects of facilitation payments.  Each 
Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations: 
 
(a) encourage enterpri ses to prohibit or discourage the use of facilitation 
payments;  
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, a Party may seek to impose visa restrictions or other immigration controls even 
absent a conviction that a foreign public official engaged in the commission of an offence described 
in paragraph 1, where there is sufficient other information to make such a determination.  
  
(b) to the extent facilitation payments may be permitted, ensure the 
solicitation, payment, or acceptance of such payments are not used to secure a material advantage in matters affecting in ternational trade or 
investment ; and 
 
(c) take any steps  considered appropriate by the Party to raise global 
awareness of the harmful effects of facilitation payments, including through regional and multilateral initiatives, with a view to stopping the solicitation, payment, and acceptance of such payments.   
 8. Each Party shall ensure that any statute of limitations applicable to any criminal offences described in this Section shall allow an adequate period of 
time for the investigation and prosecution of the offence .  
  
Article 28.10 
Persons that Report Bribery or Corruption Offences  
 1. Each Party shall, as it considers appropriate, adopt or maintain measures to ensure that its competent authorities that are responsible for the measures described in  Article 28.9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and 
Corruption), or the enforcement of those measures, are known to the public.  
 2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain publicly available procedures for a person to report to its competent authorities, including anonymously, any incident that may be considered to constitute an offence described in paragraph 1 of Article 28.9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and Corruption)  or an 
act described in paragraph 2 of Article 28.9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat 
Bribery and Corruption). 
   3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate measures, in accordance with its laws and regulation s, to protect against or provide remedy for 
discriminatory or disciplinary treatment of any person considered appropriate 
by the Party who, on reasonable belief, reports to the competent authorities any suspected incident that may be considered to constitute an offence described in  paragraph 1 of  Article 28.9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat 
Bribery and Corruption)  or an act described in  paragraph 2 of  Article 28.9 
(Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and Corruption).
4  
     
                                                            
4 For greater certainty, this paragraph is without prejudice to each Party’s right to adopt or maintain 
additional requirements for the making of such a report provided these requirements do not have the 
effect of unjustifiably limiting a person’s access to protection or remedy.  
 Article 28.11 
Promoting Integrity among Public Officials  
 
1.  To prevent and combat bribery and corruption in matters affecting 
international trade or  investment, each Party affirms its resolve to  promote, 
among other things, integrity, honesty, and responsibility among its publi c 
officials.   To this end, each Party shall endeavour, in accordance with the 
fundamental principles of its legal system, to adopt or maintain:  
 
(a)  measures to provide adequate procedures for the selection and training of individuals for public positions considered by the Party to be especially vulnerable to corruption, and the rotation, if appropriate, of those individuals to other positions;  
 
(b)  measures to promote transparency in the behaviour of public officials in the exercise of public functions;  
 
(c)  appropriate policies and procedures to identify and manage actual or potential conflicts of interest of public officials;  
 
(d)  measures that  require senior and other appropriate public officials to 
make declarations to appropriate authorities regarding, among other things, their outside activities, employment, investments, assets and substantial gifts or benefits from which a conflict of interest may result with respect to their functions as public officials; and  
 
(e)  measures to facilitate reporting by public officials of acts of bribery and corruption to competent authorities, if those acts come to their notice in the performance of their functions.  
 2.  Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain codes or standards of conduct for the correct, honourable and proper performance of public functions, and measures providing for disciplinary or other procedures , if 
warranted, against a public official who violates the codes or standards established in accordance with this paragraph.  
 3.  Each Party, to the extent consistent with the fundamental principles of its legal system, shall consider establishing procedu res through which a public 
official accused or convicted of an offence described in paragraph 1 of Article 28.9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and Corruption) may, if 
appropriate, be removed, suspended or reassigned by the appropriate authority, bearing in mind respect for the principle of the presumption of innocence.  
 4.  Each Party shall, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system and without prejudice to judicial independence, adopt or maintain measures to strengthen int egrity, and to prevent opportunities for corruption, 
among members of the judiciary in matters affecting international trade or  
 investment.  These measures may include rules with respect to the conduct 
of members of the judiciary. 
 
Article 28.12 
Participation of Private Sector and Civil Society  
 
1.  Each Party shall take appropriate measures in accordance with fundamental principles of its legal system, to promote the active participation of individuals and groups outside the public sector, such as enterprises, civil society, non- governmental organisations and community- based 
organisations, in preventing and combatting bribery and corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment, and to raise public awareness regarding the existen ce, causes, and gravity of , and the threat posed by such 
bribery and corruption.  To this end, a Party may:  
 
(a)  undertake public information activities and public education programmes that contribute to non- tolerance of bribery and 
corruption;  
 
(b)  adopt or maintain measures to encourage professional associations 
and other non- governmental organisations, if appropriate, in their 
efforts  to encourage and assist enterprises, in particular SMEs, in 
developing internal controls, ethics  and compliance progr amme s, 
codes and standards of conduct  for preventing and detecting bribery 
and corruption;  
 
(c)  adopt or maintain measures to encourage enterprise management to make statements in the enterprise’s annual reports or otherwise publicly disclose the enterpr ise’s internal controls , ethics and 
compliance programmes, including those that contribute to preventing and detecting bribery and corruption; and  
 
(d)  adopt or maintain measures that respect, promote , and protect the 
freedom to seek, receive, publish , and disseminate information 
concerning bribery and corruption,  
 
in matters affecting international trade or investment. 
 2.  Each Party shall endeavour to encourage private enterprises, taking into account their size and legal structure , to:  
 
(a)  adopt or maintain sufficient internal auditing controls and compliance 
programmes to assist in preventing and detecting acts of bribery and corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment; and   
 
(b)  ensure that their accounts and required financial statements are subject to appropriate auditing and certification procedures.  
 Article 28.13 
 
Application and Enforcement of Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery 
and Corruption  
 
1.  In accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, neither Party shall fail to effectively enforce its measures adopted or maintained to 
comply with Articles 28 .9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and 
Corruption) through 28.11 (Promoting Integrity among Public Officials)  
through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, as an encouragement for trade and investment.
5  
 2.  Each Party retains the right for its law enforcement, prosecutorial , and 
judicial authorities to exercise their discretion with respect to the enforcement of its measures to prevent and combat bribery and corruption.  Each Party 
retains the right to take bona fide decisions with regard to the allocation of its resources with respect to such enforcement.  
 3.  The Parties affirm their commitments under applicable international agreements or arrangements to cooperate with each other, consistent with their respective legal and administrative systems,  to enhance the 
effectiveness of law enforcement actions to combat the offences described in paragraph 1 of Article  28.9 (Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery and 
Corruption) or the acts described in paragraph 2 of Article 28.9 (Measures to 
Prevent and Combat Bribery and Corruption). 
 4. Recognising that the Parties have existing working relationships and can 
benefit by sharing their diverse experience and best practices in developing, implementing, and enforcing their anticorruption laws and policies, the Parties shall endeavour  to continue to cooperate: 
 
(a) in investigating and prosecuting any person subject to their respective jurisdictions that commit offences of bribery and corruption, including embezzlement, misappropriation, or other diversion of property by a public official, and the laundering of proceeds of crime; and 
 
(b) in identifying, tracing, freezing, seizing, and confiscating the 
proceeds of crime or such property, equipment , or other 
instrumentalities in connect ion with its bribery and corruption 
offences, using both conviction and non-conviction based 
confiscation powers. 
  
                                                            
5 For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that individual cases  or specific discretionary decisions 
related to the enforcement of anti -corruption laws are subject to each Party’s own domestic laws and 
legal procedures.  
 Article 28.14 
Relation to Other Agreements  
 
Nothing in this Agreement affects the rights and obligations of the 
Parties under the Anti -Bribery Convention, the UNCAC , or the United 
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime  done at New 
York on 15 November 2000. 
 
 
Article 28.15  
Cooperation, Consultation, and Dispute Settlement  
 1.  The Parties shall endeavour to make every effort through dialogue, exchange 
of information, and cooperation to address any matter that might affect the operation or application of this  Section . 
 2.  Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement), as modified by this Article, applies to this 
Section . 
 3.  A Party may only have recourse to the procedures set out in this Article and 
Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) if it considers that a measure of the other 
Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this Section, or that the other Party has otherwise fai led to carry out its obligations under this Section, in a 
manner affecting international trade or investment between the Parties.  
 4.  No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under this Article or Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) for any  matter arising under Article 28.13 
(Application and Enforcement of Measures to Prevent and Combat Bribery 
and Corruption).  
 5.  Further to Article 30.7 (Consultations – Dispute Settlement) each Party shall 
endeavour to ensure that consultations include personnel of their competent governmental authorities or other regulatory bodies who have responsibility for, or expertise in, the anti-corruption issue under dispute. 
 6. Further to the requirements set out in Article 30.10 (Qualifications of 
Panellists – Dispute Settlement),  the Parties are encouraged to appoint 
panellists, in disputes arising under this Section , who have expertise or 
experience relevant to the anti -corruption issue under dispute.29- 1 
 CHAPTER 29 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS  
 
 
Article 29.1 
Establishment of the Joint Committee  
 
The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee, composed of 
government representatives of the Parties at the level of Ministers or 
senior officials. Each Party shall be responsible for the composition of 
its delegation.  
 
 
Article 29.2 
Functions of the Joint Committee  
 1. The Joint Committee shall:  
 
(a) consider any matter relating to the implementation or operation 
of this Agreement; 
 (b) consider any proposal to amend or modify this Agreement;  (c) supervise the work of all committees, working groups and any other subsidiary bodies established under thi s Agreement;  
 (d) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment between the Parties; and  
 (e) adopt, by any means it considers appropriate on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct referred to in Article 30.13 ( Rules of Procedure and 
Code of Conduct – Dispute Settlement) and, as it considers 
appropriate, amend those Rules of Procedure or that Code of 
Conduct. 
 
2. The Joint Committee may: 
 
(a) establish , refer matters to, or consider matters raised by any 
committee , working group, or other subsidiary body; 
 (b) merge or dissolve  any committee, working group, or other 
subsidiary body established in accordance with subparagraph  
(a) or under this Agreement; 
 (c) develop arrangements for implementing this Agreement;  
  
(d) seek to resolve differences or disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement; 
 (e) issue interpretations of th is Agreement ;
1 
 (
f) seek t
he advice of non -governmental persons or groups on any 
matter falling within the Joint Committee’s functions; 
 (g) adopt, subject to completion of any applicable procedures of a Party, decisions to modify this Agreement in the instances referred to in paragraph 3.  Notwithstanding Article 32.2 
(Amendments – Final Provisions), those modifications shall  be 
adopted and  enter into force by the exchange of diplomatic 
notes between the Parties; and 
 (h) take any other action as the Parties may agree.  
 
3. Paragraph 2(g) shall apply to: 
 
(a)  the Schedules to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments) , by 
accelerating tariff elimination;  
 (b)  the rules of origin established in Annex 4B (Product- Specific 
Rules);  and 
 (c)  modifications to the Schedules to Annex 16A (Government Procurement) pursuant to Article 16.20 (Modifications and 
Rectifications to Annex – Government Procurement). 
 
 
Article 29.3 
Decision -Making  
 
The Joint Committee and all subsidiary bodies established 
under this Agreement shall take all decisions by mutual agreement. 
 
 
Article 29.4 
Rules of Procedure of the Joint Committee  
 
1.  The Joint Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry 
into force of this Agreement and thereafter as the Parties may decide, including as necessary t o fulfil its functions under Article 29.2 
(Functions of the Committee).   Meetings of the Joint Committee shall  
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, interpretations issued by the Joint Committee are binding for panels 
established under Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement).  
 be chaired on a rotating basis by representatives of the Parties at the 
level of Ministers or senior officials . 
 2.  The Party chairing a session of the Joint Committee shall provide any 
necessary administrative support for such session . 
 3.  Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Joint Committee and any subsidiary body established under this Agreement shall carry out its work through whatever means are appropriate, which may include electronic mail or videoconferencing. 
 4.  Unless otherwise decided, the Joint Committee shall adopt rules of procedure at its first meeting,  and any subsidiary body established 
under this Agreement may also establish rules of procedure for the 
conduct of its work. 
 
 
Article 29.5 
Contact Points  
 
1. Each Party shall designate an overall contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement, as well as other contact points as required by this Agreement.  
 2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall notify the other Party in writing of its designated contact points no later than 60 days after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 
 3. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party, in writing, of any changes to its overall contact point or any other contact point.  
 4. On the request of a Party, the overall contact point of the other Party 
shall identify the office or official responsible for a matter and assist, as necessary, in facilitating communication with the requesting Party .  CHAPTER 30  
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT  
 
 
Article 30.1 
Definitions  
 
  For the purposes of this Chapter:  “cases of urgency” means those cases which concern good s that rapidly lose 
their quality,  current condition, or commercial value in a short period of time;  
 “Code of Conduct ” means the code of conduct referred to in Article 30.13 
(Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct) and annexed to the Rules of Procedure;  “complaining Party” means the Party that requests the consultations under 
Article 30.7 (Consultations);  
 “panel” means a panel established under Article 30.8 ( Request for 
Establishment of a Panel)  or reconvened under Articles 30.1 5 (Compliance 
Review), 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non -Compliance), or 30.17 
(Compliance Review after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies);  “responding Party” means the Party to which a request for consultations is 
made under Article 30.7 (Consultations); and  
 “Rules of Procedure ” means the rules of procedure referred to in Article 
30.13 (Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct) and  established in 
accordance with Article 29.2.1(e) (Functions of the Joint Committee – 
Administrative and Institutional Provisions).   
  
Article 30.2 
Objective  
 
  The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient , and 
transparent process for the avoidance and settlement of any disputes arising  
between the Parties under this Agreement. 
  
Article 30.3 
Cooperation 
 
  The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation 
and application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation and consultations  to arrive at a mutually agreed  solution with 
respect to  any matter that might affect its operation or application.   
 
Article 30.4 
Scope  
 
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement when a Party considers that :  
 (a) an actual or proposed measure of the other Party is or would be inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement; or 
 
(b) the other Party has  otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under 
this Agreement .  
 2. This Chapter applies subject to such special and additional provisions on dispute settlement contained in other Chapters of this Agreement. 
 3. Subject to Article 30.5 (Choice of Forum), this Chapter shall be without 
prejudice to the rights of a Party to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures available under any other international agreement to which the Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement .  
  
Article 30.5 
Choice of Forum  
 1. If a dispute arises regarding  a right or obligation under this Agreement and a 
substantially equivalent right or obligation under another international  
agreement to which the Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute.  The 
forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of other fora
1, unless that forum 
fails to make findings on the merits of the claim for jurisdictional or procedural reasons. 
 2. For the  purposes of this Article, the complaining Party shall be deemed to 
have selected the forum in which to settle the dispute when it has requested the establishment of a panel pursuant to  paragraph 1  of Article 30.8 (Request 
for Establishment of a Panel) or requested the establishment of, or referred a matter to, a dispute settlement panel under another international  agreement.  
Where panel procedures are not provided for under another international  
agreement, the complaining Party shall be deemed to have sel ected the forum 
when it commences a dispute under the dispute settlement procedures in the relevant international agreement.   
 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, the exclusion of other fora includes the exclusion of consultations in those 
fora.   
Article 30.6 
Good Offices, Conciliation , and Mediation  
 
1. The Parties may at any time agree to voluntarily undertake an alternative method of dispute resolution, such as good offices, conciliation, or mediation.  
 2. Procedures undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1  and, in particular, positions 
taken by the Parties during these procedures shall be confidential and without preju dice to the rights of a Party in any further or other proceedings.  
 3. A Party may suspend or terminate the procedures undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 at any time.  
 4. If the Parties agree, procedures undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 may 
continue while the dispute proceeds for resolution before a panel. 
  
Article 30.7 
Consultations  
 
1. A Party may request consultations with the other Party with respect to any 
matter described in Article 30.4 (Scope).  The Party making the request for 
consultations shall do so in writing, and shall set out the reasons for the 
request, including identification of the actual or proposed measure
2 or other 
matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint.  
 2. The responding Party shall  reply in writing to the request no later than 10 
days after receipt of the request and enter into consultations in good faith.  
 3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they  shall enter into consultations no later 
than 30 days after receipt of the request. 
 4. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to the Parties.  If the consultations are held in person, they shall be held in the 
capital  of the responding Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  
 5. The Parties shall make every attempt to reach a mutually agreed solution through consultations under this Article.  To this end, each Party shall :  
 
(a)  provide sufficient factual  information to enable a full examination of 
how the matter subject to consultations might affect the operation or 
application of this Agreement;  
 
                                                            
2 The Parties shall, in the case of a proposed measure, make every effort to make the request for 
consultation under this provision within 60 days of publication of the proposed measure, without 
prejudice to the right to make such request at any time.  (b)  treat as confidential any information or material exchanged in the 
course of the consultations that is designated as confidential by the 
Party providing the information or ma terial ; and  
 (c) endeavour to ensure the participation of personnel of their competent 
governmental authorities or other regulatory bodies who have responsibility for or expertise in the matter subject to the 
consultations. 
 6. In consultations under this Article, a Party may request that the other Party make available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have expertise in the matter at issue.  
 7. Consultations and, in particular, positions taken b y the Parties during 
consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of a 
Party in any further or other proceedings. 
  
Article 30.8 
Request for Establishment of a Panel  
 
1. The complaining Party may request the establishment of a panel if: 
 
(a)  the other Party does not reply to a request for, or enter into, consultations within the time period specified in paragraph 3 of 
Article 30.7 (Consultations);  
 (b) the Parties agree not to enter into consultations; or 
 (c) the Parties fail  to resolve  the matter  through consultations within  60 
days of receipt of the request for consultations under paragraph 1 of 
Article 30.7 (Consultations). 
 2. The request for establishment of a panel shall be made in writing to the responding Party.  In the request the complaining Party shall set out the 
reasons for the request, including identification of the specific measure or 
other matter at issue and the legal basis for the complaint , including the 
provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been br eached  and to be 
addressed by the panel, sufficient to present the problem clearly.  
 3. A panel shall not be established to review a proposed measure.  Article 30.9 
Establishment and Reconvening of Panels  
 
1. Where a Party makes a request for the establishment of a panel pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 30 .8 (Request for Establishment of a Panel), a panel 
shall be established in accordance with this Article.   
 2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, a panel shall consist of three panellists.  
All nominations and appointments of panellists under this Article shall conform fully with the requirements in Article 30.10 (Qualifications of 
Panellists).  
 3. Within five days of receipt by the responding Party of a request under Article 30.8 (Request for Establishment of a Panel), the Parties shall enter into 
consultations with a view to reaching agreement on the composition of the panel, taking into account th e factual, technical , and legal circumstances of 
the dispute.  
 4. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on the composition of the panel within 10 days of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 3, a Party may, at any time thereafter, notify  the other Party that it wishes to use the 
procedures set forth in paragraphs 5 through 7.  If such a notification is made, 
the panel shall be composed in accordance with paragraphs 5 through 7. 
 5. Each Party shall appoint one panellist within 20 days  of receipt of the 
notification  referred to  in paragraph 4.  For greater certainty, a national of a 
Party may be appointed.  If the complaining Party fails to appoint its panellist, 
the dispute settlement proceedings shall lapse.    
 6. The Parties shall , within 35 days of receipt of the notification referred to in 
paragraph 4, agree on the appointment of the third panellist who shall serve as the chair of the panel.  To assist in reaching this agreement, each Party 
shall provide to the other Party a list of up to three nominees for appointment as the chair of the panel.  
 7. If any of the three panellists have not been appointed within 35 days of the 
receipt of the not ification referred to in paragraph 4 , a Party may request the 
Director- General of the WTO to appoint the remaining panellists within a 
further period of 15 days.  Any list of nominees which was provided under 
paragraph 6 shall also be provided to the Direc tor-General of the WTO and 
may be used in making the required appointment.  In the event that the 
Director- General of the WTO is a national of a Party, a Deputy Director -
General  of the WTO  or the officer next in seniority who is not a national of a 
Party s hall be requested to make the required appointment. 
 8. If the Director- General of the WTO notifies the Parties to the dispute that he 
or she is unavailable, or does not appoint the remaining panellists within 15 days of the request made pursuant to paragraph 7, a Party may request the  Secretary -General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration to appoint the 
remaining panellists within a further period of 15 days .  Any list of nominees 
which was provided under paragraph 6 shall also be provided to the 
Secretary -General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and may be used in 
making the required appointments. 
 
9. The date of establishment of the panel shall be the date on which the final panellist is appointed.  
 10. If a panellist appointed under this Ar ticle resigns or becomes unable to act,  
the panellist shall notify the Parties and a successor panellist shall be appointed in accordance with this Article and shall have all the powers and duties of the original panellist.  The work of the panel, including any 
applicable time periods, shall be suspended until the successor panellist has been appointed. 
 11. If a panel is reconvened under Articles 30.15 (Compliance Review), 30.16 
(Temporary Remedies for Non- Compliance), or 30 .17 (Compliance Review 
after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies), the reconvened panel shall, if possible, have the same panellists as the original panel.  If this is not possible, 
any successor panellist shall be appointed in accordance with this Article and  
shall have all the powers and duties of the original panellist.  
  
Article 30.10  
Qualifications of Panellists  
 1. All panellists appointed pursuant to Article 30.9 ( Establishment and 
Reconvening of Panels ) shall:  
 
(a) have demonstrated expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement , or the resolution of disputes 
arising under international trade agreements;  
 (b) be chosen on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound 
judge ment;  
 (c) be independent  of, and not affiliated with or take instructions from, a 
Party;  
 (d) serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any 
organisation or government with regard to matters related to the dispute; and 
 (e) comply with the Code of Conduct.  2. An individual shall not serve as a panellist for a dispute in which that person 
has participated under Article 30 .6 (Good Offices, Conciliation and 
Mediation).  
 
3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the chair of the panel shall not:  
 
(a) be a national of a Party;  
 (b) have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of a Party; or  
 (c) be employed by a Party.  
  
Article 30.11  
Functions of a Panel
3 
 1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the  panel shall perform its functions and 
conduct its proceedings in a manner consistent with this Agreement , the 
Rules of Procedure, and the Code of Conduct. 
 Panel Assessment  
 2. A panel shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it, including an objective assessment of:   (a) the facts of the case;  
 (b) the applicability of the provisions of this Agreement; and   (c) whether:  
 
(i) a measure of the r esponding Party is inconsistent with its 
obligations under this Agreement; or 
 (ii) the responding Party has otherwise failed to carry out its 
obligations under this Agreement. 
 Terms of Reference  
 3. A panel shall have the following terms of reference unless the Parties agree otherwise within 20 days of the establishment of a panel:  
 
 “To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement  
cited by the Parties, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of a panel made pursuant to Article 30.8 (Request for 
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, paragraphs 2, 3, and 6 shall not apply to a panel reconvened under Article 
30.15 (Compliance Review), Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non- Compliance) , or Article 
30.17  (Compliance Review after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies).  Establishment of a Panel), to make such findings as provided for in 
this Agreement, togethe r with the reasons therefor, and to issue a 
written report in accordance with Article 30.11 .6 (Functions of a 
Panel) .”  
 4. The panel shall address the relevant provisions in the Agreement cited by the  
Parties.  
 5. The panel may rule on its own jurisdiction.  
 Panel Reports and Findings  6. The panel shall set out in its reports:  
 
(a) a descriptive section summarising the submissions and arguments of the Parties;  
 (b) its findings on the facts of the case and the applicability of the provisions of this Agreement;  
 (c) its findings on whether :  
 
(i) a measure of the responding Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement;  
 (ii) the responding Party h as otherwise failed to carry out its 
obligations under this Agreement; 
 
(d) any other findings jointly requested by the Parties ; and  
 
(e) its reasons for the findings in subparagraphs (b)  through (d).  
 
7. In its report, the panel may suggest ways in which the responding Party could 
implement the findings in the report. 
 8. The panel shall base its reports on the relevant provisions of this Agreement, 
the submissions and arguments of the Parties, and any information or a dvice 
put before it in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. 
 9. The findings of the panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement.  
 10. A panel shall make its findings  by consensus. If a panel is unable to reach 
consensus, it may  make its findings by majority vote.  
 11. A panel shall interpret this Agreement in accordance with the customary rules of interpretation of public international law , including as reflected  in the 
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties .  The panel shall also consider  relevant interpretations in reports of WTO panels and the Appellate Body 
adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.  
  
Article 30.12  
Reports of a Panel 
 1. The reports of the panel shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties. The panellists shall assume full responsibility for the drafting of the reports.  
Opinions expressed in the reports of the panel by individual panellists  shall 
be anonymous.  The reports shall include any separate or dissenting opinions 
on matters not unanimously agreed.   
 Interim Report  2. The panel shall issue its interim report to the Parties within 150  days of 
establishment of the panel  or, in cases of urgency , within 90 days of 
establishment of the panel .  In exceptional cases, if the panel considers that it 
cannot release its interim report within this time period , it shall promptly 
inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of when it will issue its report.  The panel shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days  and in cases of urgency  shall make every effort 
to not exceed 15 days.    
 3. A Party may submit to the panel written comments within 20 days of receipt 
of the interim report.  After considering any written comments  by the Parties 
on the interim report, the panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate. 
 Final Report  4. The panel shall issue its final report to the Parties within 30  days , and in cases 
of urgency the panel shall make every effort to issue its final report within  15 
days, of issuance of the interim report.  The panel shall include a discussion 
in its final report of any comments made by the Parties on the interim report. 
 5. The final report of the panel shall be binding on the Parties.   
Article 30.13  
Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct  
 1. The proceedings provided for in this Chapter shall be conducted in accordance with this Chapter, the Rules of Procedure, and the Code of 
Conduct, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  On request of a Party, or on its 
own initiative, a panel may, after consulting the Parties, adopt additional rules  of procedure which do not conflict with this Chapter or the Rules of 
Procedure.  
 2. The Rules of Procedure, established in accordance with Article 29.2.1(e ) 
(Functions of the Joint Committee – Administrative and Institutional  
Provisions), shall ensure tha t: 
 
(a) there is at least one hearing before the panel at which each Party may present views orally ; 
 (b) the hearing shall be held in the capital of the responding Party, and any additional hearings shall alternate between the capitals of the Parties, unl ess the Parties agree otherwise;  
 (c) subject to subparagraph ( i), a hearing before the panel shall be open 
for the public to observe, unless the Parties agree otherwise;  
 (d) each Party has an opportunity to provide an initial written submission; 
 
(e) the panel may at any time during the proceeding address questions in writing to a Party or the Parties;   
 (f) subject to subparagraph ( i), the request for consultations, the 
request for establishment of a panel, written submissions, written versions of or al statements, any written responses to requests or 
questions from the panel, and the final report shall be released to the public;  
 (g) the panel shall  have the authority to accept and consider 
submissions from interested persons and non-governmental entities, unless the Parties agree otherwise;  
 (h) subject to consultations with the Parties, the panel may seek information or technical advice from any expert that it deems appropriate; and  
 (i) confidential information is protected. 
  
Article 30.14 
Compliance with the Final Report 
 1. If the panel finds pursuant to subparagraph 6(c)  of Article 30 .11 (Functions 
of a Panel) that a measure of the responding Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement, or that the responding Party has failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement, the responding Party shall  comply promptly with the final panel report issued pursuant to Article 30 .12 
(Reports of a Panel).  
 
2. No later than 30 days  in all cases, including cases of urgency, after the  
issuance of the final panel report, the responding Party shall notify the complaining Party:  
 
(a) of its intentions with respect to implementation, including an indication of possible steps it may take to comply with the final panel report;  
 (b) whether implementation can take place immediately; and  
 (c) if it is impracticable for implementation  to take place immediately, 
the reasonable period of time the responding Party considers it would need to comply.  
 3. If the responding Party makes a notification under subparagraph 2(c)  that it 
is impracticable to comply immediately with the final panel report, it shall have a reasonable period of time to do so.  
 4. If a reasonable period of time is required, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on the length of the reasonable period of  time.  If the Parties are unable to 
agree on the reasonable period of time within 46 days of the date the final 
panel report is issued to the Parties, a Party may request in writing the chair of the panel to determine the length of the reasonable period of time.  Such request shall be made no later than 120  days in all cases, including cases of 
urgency, after the issuance of the final panel report.  The chair shall present 
the Parties with a decision in writing, together with reasons, no later than 4 6 
days after the request.  
 5. As a guideline, the reasonable period of time, where determined by the chair 
of the panel, shall not exceed 15 months  in all cases, including cases of 
urgency, from the date of issuance of the final panel report to the Parties.  The 
length of the reasonable period of time may be extended at any time by mutual agreement of the Parties.  
 6. If the responding Party considers that it has complied with the final panel report, it shall, no later than the date of the expiry of the reasonable period of time, provide the complaining Party with a description of the steps that it has taken to comply w ith the final panel report.  Article 30.15 
Compliance Review  
 
1. If the Parties disagree on the existence or consistency with this Agreement of any steps taken to comply with the final panel report, a Party may request that the panel reconvene to decide the matter.  
 2. A request made pursuant to paragraph 1  may only be made after the earlier 
of either:  
 
(a) the expiry of the reasonable period of time  established in 
accordance with Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final Report) ; 
or  
 (b) a notifi cation by the responding Party, pursuant to paragraph 6 of 
Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final Report), that it has 
complied with the final panel report.  
 3. The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made in writing and identify 
the issues with any steps taken to comply and the legal basis for the complaint, including the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached and to be addressed by the panel, sufficient to present the problem clearly.  
 4. The panel shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it and shall set out in its compliance report: 
 
(a) a descriptive section summarising the submissions and arguments of the Parties;  
 (b) its findings on the facts of the matter ;  
 (c) its findings on the existence or consistency with this Agreement of 
any steps taken by the responding Party to comply with the final panel report ; and  
 (d) its reasons for its findings.  
 5. The panel shall reconvene within 14  days of a request made pursuant to 
paragraph 1.  The panel shall issue its final compliance report to the Parties 
no later than 120 days  or, in cases of urgency, no later than 68 days after 
receipt of the request.   
 6. The panel shall issue its interim compliance report to the Parties within 74 days of receipt of the request  under paragraph 1.  In exceptional cases, if the 
panel considers that it cannot release its interim compliance report within this time period, it sh all promptly inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for 
the delay together with an estimate of when it will issue its report.  The panel  shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days  and in cases of urgency shall 
make every effort to not exceed 15 days .  
 
7. The panel shall issue its final compliance report within 16 days in all cases, 
including cases of urgency, of issuance of the interim compliance report.  The 
panel shall accord adequate opportunity to the Parties to submit written comments on the interim compliance report. After considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim compliance report, the panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.  The panel shall include a discussion in its final compliance report of any comments made by the Parties on the interim compliance report.  
  
Article 30.16 
Temporary Remedies for Non -Compliance  
 1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations are temporary measures available in the event that the responding Party does not comply with the final panel report.  However, neither compensation nor the 
suspension of concessions or other obligations is preferred to full compliance with the final panel report.  Compensation is voluntary and, if granted, shall 
be consistent with this Agreement.  
 2. The responding Party shall, on request of the complaining Party, enter into negotiations wi th a view to agreeing on mutually acceptable compensation if:  
 
(a) the responding Party fails to provide a notification in accordance 
with paragraph 2 of Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final 
Report);  
 
(b) the responding Party has notified the complaining Party that it does not intend to comply with the final panel report;  
 (c) the responding Party fails to notify, pursuant to paragraph 6 of 
Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final Report), any steps taken 
to comply with the final panel report; or  
 (d) the panel finds, pursuant to Article 30.15 (Compliance Review), 
that the responding Party has failed to comply with the final panel report.  
 3. If one of the conditions in paragraph 2  is met and the complain ing Party 
decides not to make a request pursuant to paragraph 2 or the Parties have been 
unable to agree on compensation within 30 days in all cases, including cases of urgency, of receipt of the request made under paragraph 2, the complaining 
Party may at any time thereafter notify the responding Party in writing that it intends to suspend the application to the responding Party of concessions or other obligations under this Agreement.   
4. A notification made under paragraph 3 shall specify:  
 
(a) the level of concessions or other obligations that the complaining Party proposes to suspend; 
 (b) the relevant sector(s) to which the concessions or other obligations relate; and  
 (c) where subparagraph 5(b) applies, the reasons on which the 
complaining Party’s decision to suspend concessions or other obligations in a different sector is based.  
 5. Subject to paragraph 4 of Article 9.23 (Dispute  Settlemen t – Financial 
Services) , in considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend 
under paragraph 3, the complaining Party shall apply the following 
principles:  
 
(a) the general principle is that the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or other obligations in the same sector(s) as that in which the panel has found an inconsistency with this Agreement; and  
 (b) if it considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions or other obligations in the same sector(s) as that in which the panel has found an inconsistency with this Agreement, the complaining Party may suspend concessions or other obligations in other sectors that are subject to dispute settlement in accordance with Article 30.4 (Scope).    
 6. The level of suspension of concessions or other obligations shall not exceed a level equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment.  
 7. The complaining Party shall have the right to implement the suspension of concessions or other obligations 30 days after the date of receipt of the complaining Party’s notification by the responding Party. 
 8. The right to suspend concessions or other obligations arising under paragraph 3 shall not be exercised if:  
 
(a) a review is being undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 9 and 10; or  
 (b) the Parties have decided, pursuant to a mutually agreed solution  
reached  in accordance with Article 30.20 (Mutually Agreed 
Solution) , that the complaining Party shall not exercise its right to 
suspend concessions or other obligations pursuant to paragraph 3.  9. If the responding Party: 
 
(a) objects to the proposed level of suspension of concessions or other obligations on the basis that it  exceeds a level equivalent to the 
level of nullification or impairment; 
 (b) considers that it has complied with the terms and conditions of any compensation agreed pursuant to paragraph 2; or 
 (c) claims that the complaining Party has failed to follow the principles set out in paragraph 5,  
 
 it may request in writing, no later than 30 days after receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 3, the panel to reconvene to make findings on the 
matter.  
 10. If a panel is requested to reconvene pursuant to paragraph 9, it shall reconvene within 15 days of receipt of the request.  The panel shall present 
its decision  to the Parties no later than  90 days after the receipt of the request.  
In exceptional cases, if the panel considers that it canno t present its decision 
within this time period  it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for 
the delay together with an estimate of when it will present its decision.  The 
panel shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days and in cases of urgency 
shall make every effort to not exceed 15 days.  
 11. Concessions or other obligations shall not be suspended until the panel has presented its decision .  Any suspension of concessions or other obligations 
shall be consistent with the panel’s decision.   
  
Article 30.17 
Compliance Review after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies  
 1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be temporary and shall only be applied until such time as the responding Party has complied with the final panel report  or the Parties have reached a 
mutually agreed solution.  
 2. If the right to suspend concessions or other obligations has been exercised pursuant to paragraph 7 of Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non-
Compliance), or mutually acceptable compensation has been agreed  pursuant 
to paragraph 2 of Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non -Compliance) , 
and the responding Party considers that it has complied with the final panel report, the responding Party shall notify the complaining Party of the steps it 
has taken to comply.   
 3. Subject to paragraph 4, the complaining Party shall terminate the suspension of concessions or other obligations within 30 days of receipt of the  notifi cation in paragraph 2.  In cases where compensation has been applied, 
and subject to paragraph 4, the responding Party may terminate the 
application of such compensation within 30 days of the complaining Party’s receipt of the notification in paragraph 2.  
 4. If the Parties disagree on the existence or consistency with this Agreement of any steps notified in accordance with paragraph 2, no later than 30 days after the date of the complaining Party’s receipt of the notification, a Party may request in writing the panel to reconvene to examine the matter.
4 
 5. Paragraphs 4 through 7 of Article 30 .15 (Compliance Review) apply if the 
panel reconvenes pursuant to paragraph 4. 
 6. If the panel decides that the steps notified in accordance with paragraph 2 achieve compliance with the final panel report, the suspension of concessions or other obligations or the application of the compensation, shall be terminated no later than 30 days after the date of the decision.   
 7. If the panel decides that the steps notified in accordance with paragraph 2 do 
not achieve compliance with the final panel report, the suspension of concessions or other obligations, or the application of the compensation, may continue.  Where relevant, the level of suspension of concessions or other obligations or of the compensation, shall be adapted in light of the decision of the panel. 
  
Article 30.18 
Suspension or Termination of Proceedings  
 1. On the request of the Parties, the panel shall suspend its work at any time for a period agreed by the Parties not to exceed 12 consecutive months.  
 2.  The panel shall resume its work at any time on the request of the P arties or at 
the end of the agreed suspension period on the request of a Party.  The request shall be made in writing and notified to the panel, as well as to the other Party, where applicable.  
 3. In the event of a suspension, the timeframes set out in this Chapter and in the Rules of Procedure shall be extended by the amount of time that the panel’s work was suspended.  
 4. If the work of the panel is suspended for more than 12 consecutive months, the panel proceedings shall lapse, unless the Parties agree otherwise.   
 5. The panel shall terminate its proceedings if the Parties request it to do so.  
                                                            
4 Where a panel is reconvened pursuant to this paragraph, it may also, on request of a Party, assess 
whether the level of any existing suspension of concessions or other obligations by the complaining 
Party is still appropriate and, if not, assess an appropriate level.  Article 30.19  
Time Periods and Cases of Urgency  
 
1. Any time period referred to in this Chapter, the Rules of Procedure , or the 
Code of Conduct may be modified for a dispute by agreement of the Parties.   
 
2. The panel may at any time propose to the Parties to modify any time period, stating the reasons for the proposal. 
 3. In cases of urgency, the applicable time periods  in this Chapter shall not 
exceed half the time prescribed therein, except:  
 
(a) for the time periods specified in  Article 30.9 (Establishment and 
Reconvening of Panels), Article 30.1 7 (Compliance Review after 
the Adoption of Temporary Remedies), and Article 30.18 (Suspension or Termination of Proceedings);   
 (b) where expressed otherwise in this Chapter ; or 
 (c) where  the Parties agree otherwise.  
 4. On the request of a Party, the panel shall decide, within 15 days of the request, whether a dispute concerns a case of urgency.  
  
Article 30.20 
Mutually Agreed Solution 
 1. The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution at any time with respect to any dispute referred to in Article 30.4  (Scope).  
 2. If a mutually agreed solution is reached during panel proceedings, the Parties shall jointly notify the agreed solution to the panel.   
  
Article 30.21 
Administration of the Dispute Settlement Procedure 
 1. The Parties may agree to jointly entrust an external body with providing support for certain administrative tasks for the dispute settlement procedure under this Chapter.  
 2. The expenses of the external body shall be borne by the Parties in equal share, 
unless the Parties agree otherwise.  Article 30.22 
Contact Point  
 
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point for this Chapter and shall notify the other Party of the contact details of that contact point  within 30 days of 
entry into force of this Agreement .  Each Party shall promptly notify the other 
Party of any change to those contact details.  
 2. Any request, notification, written submission, or other document made in 
accordance with this Chapter shal l be delivered to the other Party through its 
designated contact point.  
 CHAPTER 31  
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS  
 
 
Article 31.1 
General Exceptions  
 1.  For the purposes of Chapter 2 (Goods), Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin 
Procedures), Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation), 
Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures),  Chapter 7 (Technical 
Barriers to Trade),  Chapter 13 (Investment), Chapter  14 (Digital Trade ), and 
Chapter 18 (State -Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), Article 
XX of GATT 1994 is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis .
1 
 2.  The Parties understand that the measures referred to in paragraph (b) of Article XX of GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, a nd that paragraph (g) of Article 
XX of GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living and non-living exhaustible natural resources. 
 3.  For the purposes of Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services), Chapter 9 
(Financial Services), Chapter 10 (Professional Services and Recognition of 
Professional Qualifications) , Chapter 11 (Temporary Entry for Business 
Persons),  Chapter 12 (Telecommunications), Chapter 13 (Investment),  
Chapter 14 ( Digital Trade ), and Chapter 18 (State -Owned Enterprises and 
Designated Monopolies ), paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article XIV of GATS 
are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis .
2  
The Parties understand that the measures referred to in  paragraph (b) of  
Article XIV of GATS include environmental measures necessary to protect 
human, animal or plant life or health.  
4.  Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from 
implementing the suspension of obligations, including maintaining or increasing a customs duty, that is authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO or is taken as a result of a decision by a dispute settlement panel under a free trade agreement to which both P arties are party.  
 
                                                            
1 For the purposes of Chapter 18 (State -Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), Article XX 
of GATT 1994 is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis , only with 
respect to measures of a Party (including the implementation of measures through the activities of a 
state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly) affecting the purchase, production or sale of goods, 
or affecting activities the end result of w hich is the production of goods.  
2 For the purposes of Chapter 18 (State -Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), Article XIV 
of GATS (including its footnotes) is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis 
mutandis , only with respect to measures of a Party (including the implementation of measures through 
the activities of a state- owned enterprise or designated monopoly) affecting the purchase or supply of 
services, or affecting activities the end result of which is the supply of services .  
  
Article 31.2 
Security Exceptions  
 
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to: 
 
(a)  require a Party to furnish or allow access to  any information the 
disclosure of which it determines to be contrary  to its essential 
security interests; or  
 (b)  preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers necessary for the fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or the protection of its own essential security interests.  
  
Article 31.3 
Temporary Safeguard Measures  
 
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from 
adopting or maintaining restrictive measures with regard to  payments or 
transfers for current account transactions in the event of serious balance of 
payments and external financial difficulties or threats thereof.  
 
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from 
adopting or maintaining res trictive measures with regard to payments or 
transfers relating to the movements of capital:  
  
(a)  in the event of serious balance of payments and external financial 
difficulties or threats thereof; or  
  
(b)  if, in exceptional circumstances, payments or  transfers relating to 
capital movements cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for macroeconomic management.  
  3. Any measure adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 or 2 shall:  
 
(a) not be inconsistent with Article 8.3  (National Treatment – Cross -
Border Trade in Services), Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured- Nation 
Treatment – Cross -Border Trade in Services),
 Article 9.5 (National 
Treatment – Financial Services) , Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured- Nation 
Treatment – Financial Services) , Article 13.5 (National Treatment – 
Investment), and Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment – 
Investment);3  
                                                            
3 Without prejudice to the general interpretation of Article 8.3 (National Treatment – Cross Border 
Trade in Services), Article 8.4 (Most- Favoured -Nation Treatment – Cross Border Trade in Services),  
  
(b) be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International 
Monetary Fund (“IMF”); 
 (c)
 avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests of the other Party; 
 
(d) not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in paragraph 1 or 2; 
 
(e) be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situations specified in paragraph 1 or 2 improve;  
 
(f) not be inconsistent with Article 13.9 (Expropriation and 
Compensation – Investment);4 and 
 (g) not be used  to avoid necessary macroeconomic adjustment.  
 4. A Party adopting or maintaining measures under paragraph 1 or 2 shall:  
 
(a)  promptly notify, in writing, the other Party of the measures, including 
any changes therein; and 
  
(b)  on request of the other Party, promptly commence consultations with the other Party to review the measures adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 or 2, provided that: 
 
(i)  in the case of capital movements, such consultations are not otherwise taking place outside of this Agreement; or 
 
(ii) 
 in the case of current account restrictions, such consultations are not otherwise taking place under the framework of the WTO Agreement.  
 
5. Any consultations pursuant to paragraph 4 shall take into account all relevant 
findings of a statistical nature and other facts presented by the IMF relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves, balance -of-payments, and their 
                                                            
Article 9.5 (National Treatment – Financial Services) , Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment 
– Financial Services) , Article 13.5 (National Treatment – Investment) , and Article 13.6 (Most-
Favoured -Nation Treatment – Investment), the fact that a measure adopted or maintained pursuant to 
paragraph 1 or 2 differentiates between investors on the basis of residency does not necessarily mean 
that the measure is inconsistent with Article 8.3 (National Treatment – Cross Border Trade in 
Services), Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment – Cross Border Trade in Services), Article 
9.5 (National Treatment – Financial  Services) , Article 9.8 (Most- Favoured -Nation Treatment – 
Financial Services) , Article 13.5 (National Treatment – Investment),  and Article 13.6 (Most -
Favoured -Nation Treatment - Investment ). 
4 For greater certainty, measures referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 may be non -discriminatory regulatory 
actions by a Party that are designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives as 
referred to in subparagraph 3(b) of Annex 13B (Expropr iation – Investment).  
 conclusions shall take into account the assessment by the IMF of the balance-
of-payments and the external financial situation of the Party concerned. 
 
 
Article 31.4 
Taxation Measures 
 1. For the purposes of this Article:  
 “competent authority” means:  
 (a) for Australia, the Secretary to the Treasury or a successor or an 
authorised representative; and  
 
(b) for the United Kingdom, the Commissioners for Revenue and 
Customs or a successor or an authorised representative;  
 
“listed taxes” means taxes on income, on capital gains, on the taxable capital of corporations, on the value of an investment or property
5 (other than the 
transfer of that investment or property), on estates, on inheritances, on gifts, or on generation- skipping transfers;  
 “tax convention” means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation, or any other international taxation agreement or arrangement; and   “taxes” and “taxation measures” include excise duties, but do not include:   (a)
 a “customs duty” as defined in Article 1.4 (General Definitions – 
Initial Provisions and General Definitions);      
(b) a fee or other charge in connecti on with the importation 
commensurate with the cost of services rendered; or  
 
(c) an antidumping or countervailing duty. 
 
2. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement applies to taxation measures.  
 3. The following provisions apply to taxation measures:   
(a) Article 2.3 (National Treatment – Trade in Goods), and such other 
provisions of this Agreement as are necessary to give effect to that Article, to the same extent as does Article III of GATT 1994;  
 
                                                            
5 This is without prejudice to the methodology used to determine the value of such investment or 
property under the respective law of the Parties .  
 (b) Article 2.12 (Export Duties, Taxes or other Charges – Trade in 
Goods); 
 
(c) Article  13.9 (Expropriation and Compensation – Investment); and 
 
(d) Article  13.11 (Performance Requirements – Investment).  
  
4. The following provisions apply to taxation measures other than listed taxes:  
 
(a) Article 8.3 (National Treatment – Cross -Border Trade in Services) ; 
 
(b) Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment – Cross -Border Trade 
in Services) ; 
  
(c) Article 9.5 (National Treatment – Financial Services); 
 
(d) Article 9.8 ( Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment  – Financial Services ); 
 
(e) Article 13.5 (National Treatment – Investment); and  
 
(f) Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment – Investment). 
 
5. The following provisions also apply, in relation to the purchase or consumption of particular services, to taxation measures on income, on capital gains, on the taxable  capital of corporations, or on the value of an 
investment or property
5 other than the transfer of that investment or 
property):  
 
(a) Article 8.3 ( National Treatment – Cross- Border Trade in Services; 
and  
(b) Article 9.5 ( National Treatment – Financial Services),  
 
except that nothing in this paragraph prevents a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage that relates to the purchase or consumption of particular services on requirements to provide the service in its territory.  
 6. Nothing in the provisions referred to in paragraph 4 or 5 applies to:  
(a) a non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure; 
 
(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of a non -conforming provision of 
any existing taxation measure;  
 
(c) an amendment to a non- conforming provision of any existing taxation 
measure to the extent that the amendment does not decrease its conformity, at the time of the amendment, with any of those Articles;  
  
(d) the adoption or enforcement of any new taxation measure aimed at 
ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of taxes , 
including any taxation measure that differentiates between persons based on their place of residence for tax purposes, provided that the taxation measure does not arbitrarily discriminate between persons, goods or services of the Parties
6; 
 
(e) a provision that conditions the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage relating to the contributions to, or income of, a pension trust, pension plan, superannuation fund or other arrangement to provide pension, superannuation or similar benefits, on a requirement that the Party maintain continuous jurisdiction, regulation or supervision over that trust, plan, fund or other arrangement ; or 
 
(f) any taxation measure of a Party with respect to the acquisition of an interest in residential property, where tha t measure is directed at 
facilitating home ownership for that Party’s residents.  
 
 7. Nothing in this Agreement affects the rights and obligations of the Parties under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such tax convention, the tax convention prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.  
 8.
 In the case of a tax convention between the Parties, if an issue arises as to whether any inconsistency exists between this Agreement and the tax convention, the issue shall be referred by the Parties to the competent authorities. The competent authorities shall have 12 months beginning with the date of that referral to make a determination as to the existence and extent of any inconsistency. If the competent authorities agree, that period may be extended by no more than a further 12 months. No procedures concerning the measure giving rise to the issue may be initiated under this Agreement before the expiry of that 12 month period or any extension of that period of no more than a further 12 months as may have been agreed by the competent authorities. Any pa nel established under this Agreement to consider a dispute 
related to a taxation measure shall accept as binding a determination made by the competent authorities under this paragraph. 
 9. Nothing in this Agreement shall oblige a Party to apply any most -favoured-
nation obligation in this Agreement with respect to an advantage accorded by a Party pursuant to a tax convention. 
  
                                                            
6 The Parties understand that this subparagraph must be interpreted by reference to the footnote to 
paragraph (d) of Article XIV of GATS as if the Article was not restricted to services or direct taxes.  
 Article 31.5 
Disclosure of Information  
 
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to 
furnish or allow access to information, the disclosure of which would be 
contrary to its law  or would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be 
contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate 
commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.  
  
Article 31.6 
Confidentiality of Information  
 
Each Party shall, subject to its laws and regulations, maintain the 
confidentiality of information provided in confidence by the other Party 
pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
 
Article 31.7 
The National Health Service and Australia’s health system  
  
The Parties recall the exclusions and exceptions in this Agreement 
that are applicable to the National Health Service of the United Kingdom
7 
and to  Australia’s health system , including as set out in the relevant 
provisions of this Chapter, of Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services ), 
Chapter 13 (Investment),  Chapter 15 (Intellectual Property),  Chapter 16 
(Government Procurement), and of Annex I ( Schedules of Non-Conforming 
Measures for Services and Investment ) and Annex II  (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures for Services and Investment).  
 
 
                                                            
7 For greater certainty, the National Health Service of the United Kingdom includes the National 
Health Service in England, Scotland, Wales, and Health and Social Care in Northern Ireland.  CHAPTER 32 
 
FINAL PROVISIONS  
 
 
Article 32.1 
Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes  
 
The Annexes, Appendices , and footnotes to this Agreement shall 
constitute an integral part of this Agreement.  
 
 
Article 32.2 
Amendments  
 
The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement.  Such 
amendments shall enter into force 30 days after the date on which the Parties 
exchange written notifications confirming that they have completed their 
respective domestic  requirements necessary for the entry into force of the 
amendments, or on such other date as the Parties may agree.  
 
 
Article 32.3 
Amendment of International Agreements  
 
If any international agreement, or a provision therein, that has been 
referred to in this Agreement or incorporated into this Agreement is amended, 
the Parties shall, at the request of either Party, consult each other on whether 
to amend this Agreement, unless this Agreement otherwise provides.  
 
 
Article 32.4 
Territorial Extension 
 
1. This Agreement, or specified provisions of it, may be extended to any such 
territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is 
responsible as may be agreed between Australia and the United Kingdom.  
Upon delivery of a written request by the  United Kingdom, the Parties shall 
hold consultations promptly to consider and agree the extension. Any 
amendment to this Agreement required to accommodate an extension shall 
be made in accordance with Article 32.2 (Amendments).  
 
2. For greater certainty, an extension in accordance with paragraph 1 may 
include extension of further provisions of this Agreement to the Bailiwicks 
of Guernsey and Jersey and the Isle of Man, as well as any extension to any 
other territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is 
responsible, including, but not limited to, Gibraltar.  Article 32.5 
Territorial Disapplication  
 
  The United Kingdom may at any time give notice in writing to 
Australia that this Agreement is, or specified provisions of it are, no longer 
to apply to a territory for whose international relations the United Kingdom 
is responsible.   If the United Kingdom gives notice in writing pursuant to this 
Article, the Parties shall hold consultations promptly to agree a mutually 
satisfactory solution.  Notwithstanding such consultations, if notice in writing 
is given that this Agreement as a whole is no longer to app ly to a territory for 
whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible, the 
notification shall take effect 12 months after the date on which the United 
Kingdom has provided written notice to Australia, or on such other date as 
the Parties ma y agree.  Any amendment to this Agreement required as a result 
of the Agreement, or specified provisions of it, no longer applying to a 
territory for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible 
shall be made in accordance with Article 3 2.2 (Amendments).  
 
 
Article 32.6  
General Review 
 
1. The Parties shall undertake a general review of this Agreement in the seventh 
year following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or at such times 
as may be agreed by the Parties.  
 
2. A review pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be undertaken with a view to updating 
and enhancing this Agreement, to ensure that the disciplines contained in this 
Agreement remain relevant to the trade and investment issues and challenges 
confronting the Parties.  
 
3. A review pursuant to paragraph 1 shall take into account : 
 
(a) developments in innovation ; 
 
 
(b) the work of all committees, working groups , dialogues and any  other 
subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement; and 
 
(c) relevant developments in international fora . 
 
 
Article 32.7 
Entry into Force  
 
This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after  the date on which 
the Parties exchange written notifications confirming that they have  completed their respective domestic requirements necessary for the entry into 
force of this Agreement, or on such other date as the Parties may agree. 
 
 
Article 32.8 
Termination  
 
1. A Party may terminate this Agreement by giving the other Party notice in 
writing. Such termination shall take effect six months after the date of the 
notification, or on such date as the Parties may agree.  
 
 
2. Within 30 days of the date of a notification issued under paragraph 1, either 
Party may request consultations regarding whether the termination of any 
provision of this Agreement should take effect on a date later than that 
provided in paragraph 1.  Such consultations shall commence within 30 days 
of the date of the request , or on such date as the Parties may agree . 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorised by their 
respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.1 
 
 
DONE at                                   on this        day of                                                           
and at                                         on this        day of                                                   ,  
in duplicate.  
 
 
 
For the United Kingdom of Great  For Australia:                                            
Britain and Northern Ireland :  
 
 
 
1 This testimonium is to be applied in accordance with the Exchange of Notes of the 16th December 
2021 between The British High Commission Canberra and the Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade of Australia.
