CHAPTER 16 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT  
  
 
Article 16.1  
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“build-operate- transfer contract ” and “public works concession contract ” 
means a contractual arrangement the primary purpose of which is to provide 
for the construction or rehabilitation of physical infrastructure, plants, buildings, facilities or other government -owned works and under which, as 
consideration for a supplier’s execution of a contractual arrangement, a procuring entity grants to the supplier, for a specified period of time, 
temporary ownership or a right to control and operate, and demand payment 
for the use of those works for the duration of the contract;  “commercial goods or services ” means goods or services of a type generally 
sold or offered for sale in the commercial marketplace to, and customarily purchased by, non-governmental buyers for non-governmental purposes; 
 
“construction service” means a service that has as its objective the realis ation  
by whatever means of civil or building works, based on Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional Central Product Classification (CPC);  
“electronic auction ” means an iterative process that involves the use of  
electronic means for the presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or 
new values for quantifiable non- price elements of the tender related to the 
evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or re-ranking of tenders;  
“in writing ” or “ written ” means any worded or numbered expression that can 
be read, reproduced and later communicated. It may include electronically 
transmitted and stored information;  
 “limited tendering ” means a procurement method whereby the procuring 
entity contacts a supplier or suppliers of its choice;  “multi- use list ” means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has 
determined satisfy the conditions for participation in that list, and that the 
procuring entity intends to use more than once;  
 “notice of intended procurement” means a notice published by a procuring 
entity inviting interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a 
tender, or both;  “offset ” means any condition or undertaking that encourages local 
development or improves a Party's balanc e-of- payments accounts, such as 
the use of domestic content, the licensing of technology, investment, counter -
trade and similar action or requirement;  
 “open tendering” means a procurement method whereby all interested 
suppliers may submit a tender; 
 
“procuring entity” means an entity  listed in  Annex 16A; 
 “qualified supplier ” means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as 
having satisfied the conditions for participation; 
 
“selective tendering ” means a procurement method whereby the procuring 
entity invites only qualified suppliers to submit a tender;  “services” includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;  
 
“standard” means a document approved by a recognised body that provides 
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods 
or services, or related processes and production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory.  It may also include or deal exclusively with 
terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements as they 
apply to a good, service, process or production method;  
 
“supplier” means a person or group of persons that provides or could provide  
a good or service to a procuring entity; and  
“technical specification ” means a tendering requirement that: 
 
(a) sets out the characteristics of : 
 
(i) goods to be procured, including quality, performance, 
safety and dimensions, or the processes and methods 
for their production; or 
 (ii) services to be procured, or the processes or methods for their provision, including any applicable administrative provisions; or  
 (b) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or 
labelling requirements, as they apply to a good or service. 
 
 
Article 16.2 
Scope  
 Application of Chapter  
 1. This Chapter applies to any measure regarding covered
 procurement.  
 
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, “ covered procurement ” means  government 
procurement:   
 
(a) of  a good, service , or any combination thereof as specified in each 
Party's  Schedule to Annex 16A; 
 
(b) by any contractual means, including: purchase; rental , lease or  hire 
purchase , with or without an option to buy ; build -operate- transfer 
contracts and public works concessions contracts;  
 (c) for which the value, as estimated in accordance with paragraphs  8 and 
9, equals or exceeds the relevant threshold specified in a Party's Schedule to Annex 16A , at the time of publication of a notice in 
accordance with Article 16.6 (Notices); 
 (d) by a procuring entity; and 
 
(e)
 that is not otherwise excluded fro m coverage under this Agreement. 
 
Activities Not Covered  
 
3. Unless otherwise provided in a Party's Schedule to Annex 16A, this Chapter 
does not apply to: 
 
(a) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other 
immovable property or the rights thereon;  
 (b) non- contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party , 
including its procuring entities, provides, including cooperative agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees , and fiscal 
incentives;  
 
(c) the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services, 
liquidation and management services for regulated financial  
 institutions or services related to the sale, redemption and distribution 
of public debt, including loans and government bonds, notes and other securities;  
 (d) public employment contracts;  
(e) procurement conducted: 
 
(i) for the specific purpose of provi ding international assistance, 
including development aid; 
 (ii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international 
agreement relating to the stationing of troops or relating to the joint implementation by the signatory countries of a project; or 
 
(iii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international 
organisation, or funded by international grants, loans or other assistance if the applicable procedure or condition would be inconsistent with this Chapter.  
 
Schedules 
 
4. Each Party  shall specify the following information in its Schedule to Annex 
16A: 
 
(a) in Section A , the central government entities whose procurement is 
covered by this Chapter; 
 (b) in Section B, the sub -central government entities whose procurement 
is covered by this Chapter; 
 
(c) in Section C , other entities whose procurement is covered by this 
Chapter; 
 
(d) in Section D, the goods covered by this Chapter;  
(e) in Section E , the services, other than construction services, covered 
by this Chapter; 
 
(f) in Section F, the construction services covered by this Chapter;  
 (g) in Section G, any General Notes; 
 
(h) in Section H, the applicable Threshold Adjustment Formula; and  
  
(i) in Section I , the publication of information required under paragraph 
2 of Article 16.5 ( Information on the Procurement System ). 
 
Compliance  
5.
 Each Party shall ensure that its procuring entities comply with this Chapter 
in conducting covered procurements.  
 6. No procuring entity shall prepare or design a procurement, or otherwise  
structure or divide a procurement into separate procurements in any stage of the procurement, or  use a particular method to estimate the value of a 
procurement, in order to avoid the obligations of this Chapter.  
 7. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party, including its procuring entities, from developing new procurement polici es, procedures or 
contractual means, provided that they are not inconsistent with this Chapter. 
 
Valuation 
 8.
 In estimating the value of a procurement for the purposes of ascertaining 
whether it is a covered procurement, a procuring entity shall  include the 
estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its entire duration, 
taking into account : 
 
(a) all forms of remuneration, including any premium , fee, commission, 
interest or other revenue stream that may be provided for under the 
contract; 
 (b) the value of any option clause ; and 
 (c)  any contract awarded at the same time or over a given period to one or more suppliers under the same procurement. 
 
9.
 If the total estimated maximum value of a procurement over its entire duration is not known, the procurement shall be deemed a covered procurement, unless otherwise excluded under this Agreement.  
  
Article 16.3 
General Exceptions  
 
1. Subject to the requirement that the measure is not applied in a manner that 
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between  
the Parties where the same conditions prevail , or a disguised restriction on  
 international trade  between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be 
construed to prevent a Party , including its procuring entities , from adopting 
or maintaining a measure: 
 
(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety; 
 
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; 
 
(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or  
 (d) relating to the good or service of a person with disabilities, of 
philanthropic institutions or of prison  labour. 
 
2. The Parties understand that subparagraph 1(b) includes environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.  
 
 
Article 16.4 
General Principles  
 
National Treatment and Non -Discrimination  
 1. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, each Party, 
including its procuring entities, shall accord immediately and unconditionally 
to the goods and services of the other Party and to the suppliers of the other Party, treatment no less favo urable than the treatment that the Party, 
including its procuring entities, accords to domestic goods, services, and 
suppliers. 
 
2. With respect to any measure regarding covered  procurement, neither Party , 
including its procuring entities, shall:  
 
(a) treat a locally established supplier less favourably than another locally established supplier on the basis  of the degree of foreign 
affiliation or ownership; or 
 (b) discrimi nate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the 
good or service  offered by that supplier for a particular procurement 
is a good or service of the other Party.  
 
3. All orders under contracts awarded for covered procurement shall be subject 
to paragraphs 1 and 2.  
 Use of Electronic Means  
 
4. When conducting covered procurement, a procuring entity shall use electronic means: 
 
(a) for the publication of notices; and 
 (b) to the widest extent practicable, for information exchange and 
communication, the publication of tender documentation in 
procurement procedures, and for the submission of tenders. 
 
5. When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring entity shall: 
 
(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology systems and software, including those related to 
authentication and encryption of information, that are generally 
available and interoperable with other generally available information technology systems and software; and 
 (b) establish and  maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of  
information provided by suppliers, including requests for 
participation and tenders, including establishment of the time of receipt a nd the prevention of inappropriate access. 
 
Conduct of Procurement  
 
6. A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and 
impartial manner that:  
 
(a)
 is consistent with this Chapter , using methods such as open tendering, 
selective tendering , and limited tendering;  
 (b) avoids conflicts of interest; and  
 (c) prevents corrupt practices. 
 
Rules of Origin  7. For purposes of covered procurement, a Party shall not apply rules of origin to goods or services imported from or supplied from the other  Party that are 
different from the rules of origin the Party applies at the same time in the normal course of trade to imports or supplies of the same goods or services 
from the same Party.  
 Offsets  
 
8. With regard to covered procurement, neither Party , including its procuring 
entities, shall  seek, take account of, impose or enforce any offset , at any stage 
of a procurement. 
 
Measures Not Specific to Procurement  
 
9. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to: customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on, or in connection with, importation, the method of levying those duties and charges , other import regulations or  formalities , and measures 
affecting trade in services other than measures governing covered procurement. 
  
Article 16.5 
Information on the Procurement System  
 1. Each Party shall : 
 
(a) promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision, administrative ruling of general application, standard contract clause 
mandated by law or regulation and incorporated by reference in 
notices or tender documentation and procedure s regarding covered 
procurement, and any modifications thereof, in an officia lly 
designated electronic or paper medium that is widely disseminated and remains readily accessible to the public; and  
 (b) provide an explanation thereof to the other Party, on request.  
2. Each Party shall list in Section I of its Schedule to Annex 16A :  
 
(a) the electronic or paper media in which the Party publishes the information described in paragraph 1; and 
 (b) the electronic media in which the Party publishes the notices required by Article 16 .6 (Notices), paragraph 8 of Article 16.8 ( Qualification 
of Suppliers), and paragraph 2 of Article 16.15 ( Transparency of 
Procurement Information ).  
 Article 16.6 
Notices  
 
Electronic Publication of Procurement Notices  
 
1. For covered procurement, notice s of intended procurement and notice s of 
planned procurement shall be directly accessible by electronic means, free of charge:   
 
(a)
 for central government entities that are covered under Annex 16A , 
through a single point of acces s, as listed in Section I  of its Schedule 
to Annex 16A; and 
 (b) for sub- central government entities and other entities covered under  
Annex 16A , at least, through links in a single electronic portal, as 
listed in Section I of its Schedule to Annex 16A .  If a Party maintains 
multiple points of access , it shall limit the number of  points of access 
to the extent possible.  
 
Notice of Intended Procurement  
 2. For each covered procurement, except in the circumstances described in 
Article 16.12  (Limited Tendering),  a procuring entity shall publish a notice 
of intended procurement.  The notice shall remain readily accessible to the 
public, until at least the expiration of the time  period indicated in the notice .  
 3. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended 
procurement shall include : 
 
(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information 
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the procurement; 
 (b) a description of the procurement, including  the nature and the 
quantity of  the goods or services to be procured , or the estimated 
quantity if the quantity is not know n, and a description of any options ; 
 
(c) for recurring contracts, an estimate, if possible, of the timing of 
subsequent notices of intended procurement;  
 (d) the time-frame for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the 
contract;  
 
(e) the procurement method that will be used and whether it will involve 
negotiation or electronic auction;  
 (f) if applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of 
requests for participation in the procurement; 
 (g) the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;  (h) the language or languages in which tenders or requests for 
participation may be submitted, if they may be submitted in a 
language other than an official language of the Party of the procuring entity; 
 (i) a list and  a brief description of any conditions for participation of 
suppliers, including any requirements for specific documents or 
certifications to be provided by suppliers in connection therewith, 
unless those requirements are included in tender documentation that 
is made available to all interested s uppliers at the same time as the 
notice of intended procurement; and 
 (j) if, pursuant to Article 16 .8 (Qualification of Suppliers), a procuring 
entity intends to select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be invited to tender, the criteria that will be used to select them and, if 
applicable, any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender. 
 
Notice of Planned Procurement  4. Procuring entities are encouraged to publish as early as possible in each fiscal year a notice regarding their future procurement plans ( notice of planned 
procurement), which  should include the subject -matter of the procurement 
and the planned date of publication of the notice of intended procurement. 
  
Article 16.7 
Conditions for Participation  
 
1. A procuring entity shall limit any conditions for participation in a  covered 
procurement to those  that are essential to  ensure that a supplier has the legal 
and financial capacities and the commercial and technical abilities to 
undertake the relevant procurement.  
 
2. In establishing the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:  
(a) shall not impose the condition that, in order for  a supplier to 
participate in a procurement, the supplier has previously been 
awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity of a  Party or that  
 the supplier has prior work experience in the territory of that Party;  
and 
 
(b) may require relevant prior experience if essential to meet the requirements of the procurement. 
 
3. In assessing whether a supplier satisfies the conditions for participation, a 
procuring entity  shall : 
 
(a) evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical abilities o f a supplier on the basis of that supplier's business activities 
both inside and outside the territory of the Party of the procuring entity; and 
 (b) base its evaluation on the conditions  that the procuring entity has 
specified in advance in notices or tender documentation. 
 
4. If there is supporting evidence, a Party, including its procuring entities, may 
exclude a supplier on grounds such as: 
 
(a) bankruptcy; 
 
(b) false declarations;  
 
(c) significant or persistent deficiencies in  the performance of any 
substantive requirement or obligation under a prior contract or 
contracts;  
 (d) final judgments in respect of serious crimes or other serious offences;  
 (e) professional misconduct or acts or omissions that adversely reflect on 
the commercial integrity of the supplier;  or 
 (f) failure to pay taxes.  
  
Article 16.8 
Qualification of Suppliers  
 
Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures  1. A Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier registration 
system under which interested suppliers are required to register and provide 
certain information.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that:  
 
(a) its procuring entities make efforts to minimis e differences in their 
qualification  procedures; and 
 
(b) if its procuring entities maintain registration systems, the entities 
make efforts to minimis e differences in their registration systems.  
 
3. Neither Party, including its procuring entities, shall:  
 
(a) adopt or apply any registration system or qualification procedure with 
the purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to the 
participation of suppliers of the other Party in its procurement; or 
 (b) use that registration system or qualification procedure to prevent or 
delay  the inclusion of suppliers of the other Party on a list of suppliers 
or prevent those suppliers from being considered for a particular procurement. 
 
4. If a Party or a procuring entity maintains a supplier registration system, it shall:  
 
(a) ensure that interested suppliers have access to information on the registration system through electronic means and that interested suppliers may request registration at any time; and  
 (b) if a request by a supplier is made, inform the supplier within a 
reasonable period of time of the decision to grant or reject this 
request , and if rejected, on request provide an explanation.  
 
Selective Tendering  
 5.
 If a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the procuring entity 
shall:  
 
(a) include in the notice of intended procurement  at least the information 
specified in  subparag raphs 3(a) , 3(b), 3(e), 3(f), 3(i)  and 3(j)  of 
Article 16.6 (Notices)  and invite suppliers to submit a request for 
participation; and  
 (b)
 provide, by the commencement of the time -period for tendering, at 
least the information in subparagraphs 3(c), 3(d), 3(g) and 3(h) of 
Article 16.6 (Notices) to the qualified suppliers that it notifies as 
specified in subparagraph 3(b) of Article 16.10 (Time -Periods).  
 6. A procuring entity shall allow all qualified suppliers to participate in a 
particular procurement, unless the procuring entity states in the notice of intended procurement any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitte d to tender and the criteria for selecting the limited number of 
suppliers. 
 
7. If the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of 
publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 5, the procuring entity shall 
ensure that the ten der documentation is  made available at the same time to 
all the qualified suppliers selected in accordance with paragraph 6.  
 
Multi- Use Lists  
 
8. A Party, including its procuring entities  may establish or  maintain a multi-
use list provided that  it makes continuously available  by electronic means, in 
the appropriate medium listed in its Schedule to Annex 16A , a notice inviting 
interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list. 
 9. The notice provided for in paragraph 8 shall include:  
(a) a description of the goods  or services, or categories thereof, for which 
the list may be used;  
 (b) the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion on the list and the methods that the procuring entity  or other 
government agency will use to verify a supplier ’s satisfaction of those 
conditions; 
 (c) the name and address of the procuring entity or other government 
agency  and other information necessary to contact the procuring 
entity and to  obtain all relevant documents relating to  the list; and 
 
(d) the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or 
termination, or if the period of validity is not provided, an indication of the method by which notice will be given of the termination of use of the list. 
 
10.  A Party, including its procuring entities, that establishes or maintains a multi-
use list, shall:  
 
(a) allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion on the multi -use list; 
and  
 (b) include on the list, within a reasonable period of time, all suppliers 
that satisfy the conditions for participation set out in the notice referred to in paragraph 6. 
 
11. If a supplier that is not included on a multi -use list submits a request for 
participation in a procurement based on the multi -use list and submits all 
required documents, within the time period provided for in  paragraph 2 of 
Article 16.10  (Time -Periods), a procuring entity shall examine the request.   
The procuring entity shall not exclude the supplier from consideration in respect of the procurement on the grounds that the entity has insufficient time 
to examine the request, unless, in exceptional cases, due to the complexity of 
the procurement, the  procuring entity is not able to complete the examination 
of the request within the time period allowed for the submission of tenders. 
 Section B and Section C Entities  
 
12. A procuring entity covered under  Sections B (Sub- Central Government 
Entities) or C (Other Entities) of a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  may use 
a notice inviting suppliers to apply for inclusion on a multi -use list as a notice 
of intended procurement, provided that:  
 
(a) the notice is published in accordance with paragraph 8 and includes the information required under paragraph 9, as much of the 
information required under  paragraph 3 of Article 16.6 (Notices)  as 
is available and a statement that it constitutes a notice of intended 
procurement or that only the suppliers on the multi -use list will 
receive further notices of procurement covered by the multi -use list; 
and 
 (b) the entity promptly provides to suppliers that have expressed an interest in a given  procurement to the entity, sufficient information to 
permit them to assess their interest in the procurement, including all 
remaining information required in paragraph 3 of Article 16.6 
(Notices), to the extent that information is available.  
 
13. A procuring entity covered under Sections B (Sub- Central Government 
Entities) or C (Other Entities) of a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  may allow 
a supplier that has applied for inclusion on a multi -use list in accordance with 
paragraph 11 to tender in a given procurement, if there is sufficient time for 
the procuring entity to examine whether the supplier satisfies the conditions 
for participation.  
 Information on Procuring Entity Decisions 
 14. A procuring entity or other entity of a Party shall promptly inform any 
supplier that submits a request for participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi -use list of the decision with respect to the 
request or application.  
 15. If a procuring entity  or other entity of a Party reject s a supplier’s request for 
participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi -use list, 
ceases to recogni se a supplier as qualified, or removes a supplier from a 
multi- use list, the entity shall promptly inform the supplier and, on request of 
the supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written explanation of the reasons for its decision. 
  
Article 16.9 
Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation  
 
Technical Specifications  1. A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt  or apply any technical 
specification or prescribe any conf ormity assessment procedure with the 
purpose or effect of creating an unnecessary obstacle to trade between the 
Parties. 
 2. In prescribing the technic al specifications for the good or service  being 
procured, a procuring entity shall, if appropriate:  
 
(a) set out the technical specifications in terms of performance and 
functional requirements, rather than design or descriptive characteristics; and  
 
(b) base the technical specifications on international standards, if these 
exist; otherwise, on national technical regulations, recognised 
national standards or building codes. 
 
3. If design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical specifications, 
a procuring entity should indicate, if appropriate, that it will consider tenders 
of equivalent goods or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the procurement by including words such as "or equivalent" in the tender documentation. 
 4. A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or 
refer to a particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, 
specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently  
 precise or intellig ible way of describing the procurement requirements and 
provided that, in these  cases, the procuring entity includes words such as "or 
equivalent" in the tender documentation. 
 
5. A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the  
effect of precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation 
or adoption of any technical specification for a specific procurement from a 
person that may have a commercial interest in the procurement.  
 6. For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may, in 
accordance with this Article, prepare, adopt or apply  technical specifications 
to promote the conservation of natural resources or protect the environment. 
 7. For greater certainty, this Chapter is not in tended to preclude a Party, or its 
procuring entities, from preparing, adopting or applying technical specifications required to protect sensitive government information, 
including specifications that may affect or limit the storage, hosting or 
processing of that information outside the territory of the Party . 
 Tender Documentation  8. A procuring entity shall  make available to  suppliers tender documentation 
that includes all information necessary to permit suppliers  to prepare and 
submit responsive tenders . Unless already provided in the notice of intended 
procurement, that documentation shall include a complete description of: 
 
(a) the procurement, including the nature, and the quantity of the good or 
service to be procured or, if the quantity is not known, the estimated 
quantity and any requirements to be fulfilled, including any technical specifications, conformity assessment certification , plans, drawings 
or instructional materials;  
 
(b) any conditions for participation, including information and 
documents that suppliers are required to submit; 
 (c) all evaluation criteria the entity will apply in the awarding of the 
contract, and t he relative importance of  those criteria;  
 (d) if the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic means, any authentication and encryption requirements or other requirements related to the submission of information by electronic means;  
 (e) if the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules, 
including identification of the elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, on which the auction will be conducted; 
 (f) if there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time and place for the opening and, if appropriate, the persons authorised to be 
present;  
 
(g) any other terms or conditions , including terms of payment and any 
limitation on the means by which tenders may be submitted, such as whether on paper or by electronic means; and 
 (h) any date for the delivery of a good or the supply of a service. 
 
9. In establishing any date for the delivery of a good or the supply of a service  
being procured, a procuring entity shall take into account f actors such as the 
complexity of the procurement , the extent of subcontracting anticipated and 
the realistic time required for production, de -stocking and transport of goods 
from the point of supply or for supply of services. 
 10. The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or te nder 
documentation may include, among others, price and other cost factors, 
quality, technical merit, environmental characteristics and terms of delivery.  
 
11. A procuring entity shall promptly: 
 
(a) make available tender documentation to ensure that interested 
suppliers have sufficient time to submit responsive tenders; 
 
(b) provide, on request, the tender documentation to any interested supplier; and  
 
(c) reply to any reasonable request for relevant information by an 
interested or participating supplier, provided that the information 
does not give that supplier an advantage over other suppliers. 
 
Modifications  
12. If, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the criteria or 
requirements set out in a notice of intended procurement or tender 
documentation provided to a participating supplier, or amends or reissues a notice or tender documentation, it shall transmit in writing all those modifications or the amended or re-issued notice or tender documentation:  
 (a) to all suppliers that are participating in the procurement at the time of 
the modification, amendment or re -issuance, if those suppliers are 
known to the  procuring enti ty, and in all other cases, in the same 
manner as the original information was made available; and  
 
(b) in adequate time to allow  those suppliers to modify and re -submit  
their initial tenders, as appropriate. 
 
Preliminary Market Research and Engagement  13. For greater certainty, a procuring entity may , prior to publication of a notice 
of intended procurement, conduct market  research and engagement  with 
suppliers with a view to informing and developing technical specifications 
and other tender documentation for  a particular procurement or informing 
suppliers of its procurement plans and requirements.   A procuring entity shall 
take appropriate steps to ensure that suppliers participating in that market 
research or engagement do not gain an  unfair advantage over other interested 
suppliers.  
  
Article 16.10  
Time -Periods  
 
General  
 1. A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs, provide sufficient time for suppliers to prepare and submit requests  for participation 
and responsive tenders, taking into account factors such as : 
 
(a) the nature and complexity of the procurement; 
 (b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and 
 
(c) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non- electronic means 
from foreign as well as domestic points if electronic means are not 
used. 
 
Deadlines  2. A procuring entity that uses selective tendering shall establish that the final date for the submission of  requests for participation shall not, in principle, be 
less than 25 days from the date of publication of the notice of intended procurement.  I f a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity 
renders this time -period impracticable, the time -period may be reduced to no 
less than 10 days.  
 3. Except as provided for in paragraphs 4, 5, 8 and 9 a procuring entity shall 
establish that the final date for the submission of te nders shall not be less than 
40 days from the date on which: 
 
(a) in the case of open tendering, the notice of intended procurement is 
published; or 
 (b) in the case of selective tendering , the procuring entity notifies the 
suppliers that they will be invited to submit tenders , whether or not it 
uses a multi -use list.  
 
4. A procuring e ntity may reduce the time -period for tendering set out in  
paragraph 3 to no less than 10 days if: 
 
(a) the procuring entity has published a notice of planned procurement under Article 16.6 (Notices)  at least 40 days and no more than 12 
months in advance of the publication of the notice of intended procurement, and the notice of planned procurement contains: 
 
(i) a description of the procurement; 
 (ii) the approximate final dates for the submission of tenders or 
requests for participation; 
 
(iii) a statement that interested suppliers should express their interest in the procurement to the procuring entity; 
 
(iv) the address from which documents relating to the 
procurement may be obtained; and 
 (v) as much of the information that is required for the notice of intended procurement under paragraph 3 of  Article 16.6 
(Notices) as is available;  
 
(b) the procuring entity, for recurring contracts, indicates in an initial notice of intended procurement that subsequent notices will provide 
time-periods for tendering based on this paragraph; or 
 (c) a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity renders the time period for tendering set out in paragraph 3 impracticable . 
 
5. A procuring entity may reduce the time-period for tendering set out in  
paragraph 3 by five days for each one of the following circumstances: 
 
(a) the notice of intended procurement is published by electronic means;  
  
(b) the tender documentation is made available by electronic means from the date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement; and  
 (c) the procuring entity accepts tenders by electronic means.  
 
6. The use of paragraph 5, in conjunction with paragraph 4, shall in no case 
result in the reduction of the time -period for tendering set out in  paragraph 3 
to less than 10 days from the date on which the notice of intended procurement is published. 
 
7. A procuring entity shall require all interested or participating suppliers to 
submit requests for participation or tenders in accordance  with a common 
deadline.  These time periods, and any extension of these time periods, shall be the same for all interested or participating suppliers.  
 
8. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article, if a procuring entity 
purchases commercial good s or services, or any combination thereof, it may 
reduce the time -period for tendering established in accordance with 
paragraph 3 to not less than 13 days, provided that it publishes by electronic means, at the same time, both the notice of intended procurement and the tender documentation.  In addition, if the entity accepts tenders for 
commercial goods or services by electronic means, it may reduce the time-period established in accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than 10 days. 
 9. If a procuring entity covered under Sections B (Sub- Central Government 
Entities) or C (Other Entities) of a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  has 
selected all or a limited number of qualified suppliers, the time -period for 
tendering may be fixed by agreement between the procuring entity and the selected suppliers.   In the absence of agreement, the period shall not be less 
than 10 days. 
 
 
Article 16.11  
Negotiations 
 
1. A Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations if: 
 
(a) the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in 
the notice of intended procurement required under paragraph 2 of 
Article 16.6 (Notices); or  
 (b) it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the most 
advantageous in terms of the specific evalu ation criteria set out in the 
notice of intended procurement or tender documentation.  
 2. A procuring entity shall: 
 
(a) ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is carried out in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the 
notice of intended procurement or tender documentation; and 
 
(b) when  negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the 
remaining participating suppliers to submit any new or revised 
tenders.  
  
Article 16.12  
Limited Tendering  
 
1. Provided that it does not use this provision for the purpose of avoiding competition  among suppliers  or in a manner that discriminates against 
suppliers of the other Party, or protects domestic suppliers , a procuring entity 
may use limited tendering and may choose not to apply Articles 16.6 
(Notices) through 16.8 (Qualification of Suppliers), paragraphs 8 through 12 
of Article  16.9 (Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation) , and 
Articles  16.10  (Time -Periods), 16.11  (Negotiations), 16.13  (Electronic 
Auctions) and 16.14 ( Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts ) only 
under any of the following circumstances: 
 
(a) if: 
 
(i) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested 
participation; 
 
(ii) no tenders  were submitted  that conform to the essential 
requirements in  the tender documentation;  
 
(iii) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or 
 
(iv) the tenders submitted were  collusive,  
 provided that the requirements of the tender documentation are not 
substantially modified ; 
 
(b) if the  good or service  can be supplied only by a particular supplier 
and no reasonable alternative or substitute good or service exists  for 
any of the following reasons: 
 
(i) the requirement is for a work of art;  
 (ii) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; 
or 
 (iii) due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;  
 
(c) for additional deliveries by the original supplier  of goods or services 
that were not included in the initial procurement if a change of supplier for those additional goods or services: 
 
(i) cannot be made for  technical reasons such as requirements of 
interchangeability or interoperability with existing 
equipment, software, services or installations procured under 
the initial procurement; and  
 (ii) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs for the procuring entity; 
 
(d) for goods purchased on a commodity market;  (e) if a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that is intended for limited trial or that is  developed at its request  in 
the course of, and for, a particular contract for research, experiment, 
study or original development.  Original development of a prototype 
or a first good or service may include limited production or supply in 
order to incorporate the results of field testing and to demonstrate  that 
the prototype of the  first good or service is suitable for production or 
supply in quantity to acceptable quality standards, but does not 
include quantity production or supply to establish commercial 
viability or to recover research and development c osts.  Subsequent 
procurements of these newly developed goods or services, however, shall be subject to this Chapter ; 
 
(f) for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that 
only arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals  such 
as those arising from liquidation, bankruptcy or receivership , but not 
for routine purchases from regular suppliers;  
 
(g) if a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:  
 
(i) the contest has been organised in a manner  that is consistent 
with this Chapter; and  
 
(ii) the contest is judged  by an independent jury with a view to  
award  a design contract to the winner; or  
 (h) in so far as is strictly necessary if, for reasons of extreme urgency 
brought about by events unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the good or service could not be obtained in time by means of open or selective tendering.  
 
2. A procuring entity shall prepare a report in writing on each contract awarded 
under paragraph 1.  The report shall include  the name of the procuring entity, 
the value and kind of  good or service  procured, and a statement that indicates  
the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 1 that justified the 
use of limited tendering. 
 
 
Article 16.13  
Electronic Auctions 
 
If a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an 
electronic auction, the entity shall provide each participant, before 
commencing the electronic auction, with:  (a) the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, that is based on the evaluation criteria set out in the tender documentation and that will be used in the automatic ranking or re -
ranking during the auction; 
 (b) the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of its tender if the contract is to be awarded on the basis of the most advantageous tender; and 
 (c) any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction. 
 
 
Article 16.14  
Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts  
 Treatment of Tenders  
 1. A procuring entity shall receive, open and treat all tenders under procedures 
that guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement process, and the confidentiality of tenders.  
 2. A procuring entity shall not penali se any supplier whose tender is received 
after the time specified for receiving tenders if the delay is due solely to mishandling on the part of the procuring entity.  
 3. If a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct 
unintentional errors of form between the opening of tenders and the awarding  
of the contract, the procuring entity shall provide the same opportunity to all participating suppliers.  
 Awarding of Contracts 
 
4. To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and shall, at the time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and tender documentation and be submitted by a supplier who 
satisfies the conditions for participation. 
 5. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a co ntract, it shall award the contract to the supplier that the procuring 
entity has determined to be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based solely on the evaluation criteria specified in the notice  and tender 
documentation, submits: 
 
(a) the most advantageous tender; or 
 (b) if price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.  
 
6. If a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower than the prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the supplier that it satisfies the conditions for participation and is capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract.  
 
7. A procuring entity shall not use opti ons, cancel a covered procurement, or 
modify  or terminate awarded contracts in a manner that circumvents  the 
obligations of this C hapter. 
 
 
Article 16.15  
Transparency of Procurement Information   
 Information Provided to Suppliers  
 
1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating suppliers of the  
contract award  decision  and, on the request of a supplier, shall do so in 
writing. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.16 (Disclosure of 
Information) , a procuring entity shall, on request, provide an unsuccessful 
supplier with an explanation of the reasons why the entity did not select its 
tender and the relative advantages of the successful supplier's tender.  
 Publication of Award Information 
 2. Not later than 72 days after the award of each contract covered by this Chapter, a procuring entity shall publish a  notice in an appropriate electronic 
medium  listed in Annex 16A  and the information  shall remain readily 
accessible for a reasonable period of time.  The notice  shall include at least 
the following information: 
 
(a) a description of the good or service procured; 
 (b) the name and address of the procuring entity; 
 
(c) the name and address of the successful supplier;  
 (d) the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken into account in the award of the contract; 
 (e) the date of award; and  
 (f) the procurement method used, and in cases where limited tendering was used in accordance with Article 16.12 (Limited Tendering) , a 
description of the circumstances justifying the use of limited 
tendering. 
 
Maintenance of  Documentation, Reports and Electronic Traceability 
 
3. Each procuring entity shall, for a period of at least three years from the date 
it awards a contract, maintain:  
 
(a) the documentation and reports of tendering procedures and contract 
awards relating to covered procurement, including the reports required under Article 16.12 (Limited Tendering); and 
 (b) data that ensure the appropriate traceability of the conduct of cove red 
procurement by electronic means.  
  
Article 16.16  
Disclosure of Information  
 
Provision of Information to Parties  1. On request of the other Party, a Party shall provide promptly any information 
necessary  to determine  whether a procurement was conducted  fairly, 
impartially and in accordance with this Chapter, including  information on the  
 characteristics and relative advantages of the successful tender . In cases 
where release of the information would prejudice competition in future 
tenders,  the Party that receives the information shall not disclose it to any 
supplier, except after consulting with, and obtaining the agreement of  the 
Party that provided the information. 
 
Non-Disclosure of Information  
 
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including its procuring entities, shall not provide to any particular supplier  information 
that might prejudice fair competition between suppliers.  
 3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party, including its 
procuring entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential information if that disclosure:  
 
(a) would impede law enforcement;  
 (b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;  
 (c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons, including the protection of intellectual property; or 
 (d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.  
 
Article 16.17  
Environmental, Social and Labour Considerations  
 
A Party, including its procuring entities, may:  (a) take into account environmental, social and labour considerations  
throughout the procurement  procedure, provided they are : 
 
(i) based on objectively verifiable criteria; 
 
(ii) non- discriminatory ; and  
 (iii) indicated in the notice of intended procurement or tender documentation; and  
 (b) take appropriate measures to ensure compliance with its obligations in the fields of environmental , social and labour law, provided they 
are non- discriminatory .  
 Article 16.18  
Ensuring Integrity in Procurement Practices  
 
1. Each Party shall ensure that criminal or administrative measures exist to 
address corruption, fraud, and other illegal acts in its government 
procurement.  
 2. These measures may include procedures to render ineligible for , or exclude 
from,  participation in the Party’s procurements, either indefinitely or for a 
stated period of time, suppliers that the Party has determined to have engaged in corrupt,  fraudulent or other illegal  acts in relation to government 
procurement in the Party’s territory . When applying those procedures, each 
party, including its procuring entities:  
 
(a) may consider  the gravity of the  supplier’s acts or omissions, and any 
remedial measures or mitigating factors ; and 
 
(b) shall treat a supplier of the other Party with due process, in accordance 
with its  government procurement policies and frameworks. 
 
3. Each Party shall also ensure that it has in place policies and procedures to 
eliminate to the extent possible or manage any potential conflict of interest 
on the part of those engaged in or having influence over a procurement. 
 
4. Each Party may put in place policies or procedures that require successful 
suppliers to maintain and enforce appropriate measures, such as internal 
controls, business ethics, and compliance program mes, for preventing and 
detecting corruption, fraud, and other illegal acts, provided they are  non-
discriminatory . 
  
Article 16.19  
Domestic Review Procedures 
 
1. Each Party shall maintain, establish or designate at least one impartial 
administrative or judicial authority (" review authority ") that is independent 
of its procuring entities to review, in a non- discriminatory, timely, 
transparent and effective manner, a challenge or com plaint ( "complaint" ) by 
a supplier that there has been : 
 
(a) a breach of this Chapter; or 
 (b) if the supplier does not have a right to directly challenge  a breach of  
this Chapter under the law of a Party, a failure  of a procuring entity 
to comply with the  Party's measures implementing this Chapter,  
  
arising in the context of a covered procurement, in which the supplier has, or had, an interest.   The procedural rules for all complaints  shall be in writing 
and made generally available.  
2. In the event of a complaint by a supplier, arising in the context of covered 
procurement in which the supplier has, or  had, an interest, that there has been 
a breach  or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, the Party of the procuring 
entity conducting the procurement shall encourage  the procuring  entity and 
the supplier to seek resolution of the complaint through consultations.  Th e 
procuring entity shall accord im partial and timely consideration to the 
complaint in a manner that is not prejudicial to the supplier's participation in 
ongoing or future procurement or to its right to seek corrective measures 
under the administrative or judicial review procedure.  
 3. Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient period of time to prepare and 
submit a challenge, which in no case shall be less than 10 days from the time 
when the basis of the challenge became known or reasonably should have become known to the supplier.  
 4. If a body other than the review  authority initially reviews a complaint , the 
Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision to the 
review authority  that is independent of the procuring entity whose 
procurement is the subject of the complaint. 
 5 If the review authority has determined that there has been a breach or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, a Party may limit compensation for the loss or 
damages suffered to either the costs reasonably incurred in the preparation of 
the tender or in bringing the complaint, or both. 
 6. Each Party shall ensure that  a review body that is not a court  shall have its 
decision subject to judicial review or have procedures that provide that: 
 
(a) a procuring entity shall respond in writing to a supplier’s complaint  
and provide all relevant documents to the review authority; 
 (b) a supplier that initiates a complaint shall be provided an opportunity 
to reply to the procuring entity’s response before the review authority 
takes a decision on the com plaint;  
 (c) the participants shall have the right to be represented and accompanied;  
 
(d) the participants shall have access to all proceedings;  
 (e) the participants shall have the right to request that the proceedings 
take place in public and that witnesses may be presented; and  
 (f) the review authority shall provide its decisions or recommendations 
in a timely fashion, in writing, with  an explanation of the basis for 
each decision or recommendation. 
  
7. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for:  
(a) prompt interim measures  to preserve the supplier's opportunity to 
participate in the procurement; and 
 (b) corrective action that may include compensation under paragraph 5.  The procedures may provide that overriding adverse consequences for the 
interests concerned, including the public interest, may be taken into account 
when deciding whether those measures should be applied.  Just cause for not 
acting shall be provided in writing.  
 
Article 16.20  
Modifications and Rectifications  to Annex   
 
1. A Party may modify or rectify its Schedule to Annex 16A, pursuant to 
paragraphs 2 through 10. 
 Notification of Proposed Modification  2. A Party shall notify any proposed modification or rectification (collectively referred to as a "modification") to its Schedule  to Annex 16A  in writing  to 
the other Party .  
 3. The notification of proposed modification shall contain:   
(a) for any proposed withdrawal of an entity from its Schedule to Annex 16A in exercise of its rights on the grounds that government control 
or influence over the procuring entity's covered procurement has been effectively eliminated, evidence of that eliminat ion; or   
 
(b) for any other proposed modification, information as to the likely consequences of the change for the coverage provided for in this Chapter; and 
 (c) a proposal for any necessary compensatory adjustments pursuant to paragraph 4.  
 Compensatory Adjustments  
 
4. Subject to para graphs 5 and 6, a Party shall provide appropriate 
compensatory adjustments for a change in coverage, if necessary, to maintain a level of coverage comparable to  the coverage that existed  prior to the 
modification . 
 5. The Parties may agree another form of resolution as an alternative to 
compensatory adjustments. 
 6. A Party is not required to  provide compensatory adjustments to the other 
Party if  the proposed modification: 
 
(a) covers a procuring entity over which the Party has effectively 
eliminated its control or influence in respect of covered procurement by that procuring entity ; or 
 (b) is minor or of a purely formal nature, including a rectification  as 
described in paragraph 7. 
 Rectifications  
 7. The following modifications to a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  shall be 
considered a rectification, provided that they do not affect the  coverage 
provided for in this Chapter:  
 
(a) a change in the name of a procuring entity; 
 
(b) a merger of two or more procuring entities listed within a Section  of 
a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A; 
 
(c) the separation of a procuring entity listed in a Party’s Schedule to Annex 16A  into two or more procuring entities that are added to the 
procuring e ntities listed in the same Section of the Annex ; and 
 (d) changes in website references. 
  Objection to Notification  
 8. If the other Party disputes that:  
 
(a) a compensatory adjustment proposed under sub- paragraph 3( c) is 
adequate to maintain  a level of coverage comparable to the coverage 
that existed prior to the modification ; 
 
(b) the proposed modification covers a procuring entity over which the Party has effectively eliminated its control or influenc e; or  
 (c) the proposed modification is a change provided for in paragraph 6(b) , 
 
it shall notify the modifying Party of its objection in writing within 45 days 
of receipt of the notification of proposed modification referred to in 
paragraphs 2 and 3 or shall be deemed to have agreed to the proposed 
modification.  
 9. Where a Party submits an objection pursuant to paragraph 8, it shall set out , 
as may apply , the reasons why it believes: 
 
(a) the modification  is not a change provided for in subparagraphs 6(a) 
or 6(b)  and describe the effect of the proposed modification on the 
coverage provided for in the Chapter; and 
 (b) a compensatory adjustment proposed under subparagraph 3(c) is not adequate to maintain a level of coverage comparable to t he 
coverage that existed  prior to the modification . 
 Implementation of Modifications  10. The Joint Committee shall adopt a modification to the Schedule to Annex 
16A in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.2 (Functions of the 
Joint Committee – Administrative and Institutional Provisions) to reflect any 
agreed modification . 
  
Article 16.21  
Facilitation of Participation by SMEs  
 
1. The Parties recognise the important contribution that SMEs can make to 
economic growth and employment and the importance of facilitating the participation of SMEs in government procurement. 
 2. If a Party maintains a measure that provides preferential treatment for SMEs, 
the Party shall ensure that the measure, including the criteria for eligibility, 
is transparen t. 
 3. To facilitate participation by SMEs in covered procurement, each Party shall, to the extent possible and if appropriate:   
 
(a) provide comprehensive procurement -related information  that 
includes a definition of SMEs  in a single electronic portal;   
 (b) make all tender documentation available free of charge;   
 
(c) conduct procurement by electronic means or through other new 
information and communication technologies;  
  
(d) consider the size, design, and structure of the procurement , including 
the use of subcontracting by SMEs; 
 (e) seek opportunities to simplify administrative processes;  and 
 
(f) require prompt payment by procuring entities , and that procuring 
entities encourage its use in subcontracting. 
 
 
Article 16.22  
Cooperation 
 
1. The Parties recognise their shared interest in cooperating to promote 
international liberalisation of government procurement markets with a view to achieving enhanced understanding of their respective government 
procurement systems and to improving access to their respective markets.  
 
2. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in matters such as:  
 
(a)
 facilitating participation by suppliers in government procurement, in 
particular, with respect to SMEs ; 
 (b) exchanging experiences and information, such as regulatory frameworks and best practices, including on t he use and adoption of 
measures to promote environmental, social and labour considerations  
in government procurement; 
 (c)
 exchanging government procurement statistics and data; 
 (d) developing and expanding the use of electronic means in government procurement systems;  
 (e) institutional strengthening for the fulfilment of the provisions of this Chapter; 
 (f) encouraging greater  participation by women in government 
procurement to the extent possible; and  
 
(g) exchanging information relating to government procurement opportunities in each Party .