  CHAPTER  18 
 
STATE- OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES  
 
 
Article 18.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“Arrangement” means the Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits, developed within the framework of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (“OECD”)  and adopted by its Council on 30 
June 2021, or a successor undertaking, whether developed within or outside 
of the OECD framework, that has been adopted by at least 12 original WTO Members that were Participants to the Arrangement as of January 1, 1979;  
 “commercial activities” means activities which an enterprise undertakes with an orientation toward profit-making,
1 and which result in the production of a 
good or supply of a service that will be sold to a consumer in the relevant market in quantities and at prices determined by the enterprise;
2 
 “commercial considerations” means price, quality, availability, 
marketability, transportation, and other terms and conditions of purchase or sale, or other factors that would normally be taken into account in the commercial decisions of a privately owned ente rprise in the relevant business 
or industry;  “designate” means to establish, designate or authorise a monopoly, or to expand the scope of a monopoly to cover an additional good or service;  “designated monopoly” means a privately owned monopoly that is designated after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and any government monopoly that a Party designates or has designated;  “government monopoly” means a monopoly that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party or by another government monopoly;  
 “independent pension fund” means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party that: 
 
(a) is engaged exclusively in the following ac tivities: 
 
                                                      
1 For greater certainty, activities undertaken by an enterprise which operates on a not -for-profit basis 
or on a cost -recovery basis are not activities undertaken with an orientation toward profit -making.  
2 For greater certainty, measures of general application to the relevant market shall not be construed 
as the determination by a Party of pricing, production, or supply decisions of an enterprise.  (i)  administering or providing a plan for pension, retirement, 
social security,  disability,  death  or employee benefits, or any 
combination thereof , solely for the benefit of natural persons 
who are contributors to such a plan and their benefici aries; or  
 
(ii) investing the assets of these plans;  
 
(b) has a fiduciary duty to the natural persons referred to in subparagraph (a)(i); and  
 (c) is free from investment direction from the government of the Party;
3 
 
“market” means the geographical and commercial market for a good or service;  
 “monopoly” means an entity, including a consortium or government agency, that in any relevant market in the territory of a Party is designated as the sole provider or purchaser of a good or service, but does not include an entity that has been granted an exclusive intellectual property right solely by reason of the grant;  
 “non- commercial assistance”
4 means assistance to a state- owned enterprise 
by virtue of that state -owned enterprise’s government ownership or control, 
where:  
 
(a) “assistance” means:  
 
(i) direct transfers of funds or potential direct transfers of funds or liabilities, such as:  
 (A)  grants or debt forgiveness;  (B) loans, loan guarantees , or other types of financing on 
terms more favourable than those commercially available to that enterprise;  or 
 
                                                      
3 Investment direction from the government of a Party: (a) does not include general guidance with 
respect to ri sk management and asset allocation that is not inconsistent with usual investment 
practices; and (b) is not demonstrated, alone, by the presence of government officials on the 
enterprise’s board of directors or investment panel.  
4 For greater certainty, no n-commercial assistance does not include: (a) intra -group transactions 
within a corporate group including state -owned enterprises, for example, between the parent and 
subsidiaries of the group, or among the group’s subsidiaries, when normal business practi ces require 
reporting the financial position of the group excluding these intra -group transactions; (b) other 
transactions between state -owned enterprises that are consistent with the usual practices of privately 
owned enterprises in arm’s length transacti ons; or (c) a Party's transfer of funds, collected from 
contributors to a plan for pension, retirement, social security, disability, death or employee benefits, 
or any combination thereof, to an independent pension fund for investment on behalf of the 
contributors and their beneficiaries.  (C) equity capital inconsistent with the usual investment 
practice, including for the provision of risk capital, of private investors; or  
 
(ii) goods or services other than general infrastructure on terms more favourable than those commercially available to that enterprise;  
 
(b) “by virtue of that state -owned enterprise’s government ownership or 
control”5 means that the Party or any of the Party’s  state enterprises 
or state -owned enterprises: 
 
(i) explicitly limits access to the assistance to the Party’s state -
owned enterprises; 
 (ii) provides assistance which is predominately used by the Party’s state -owned enterprises; 
 (iii) provides a dispropor tionately large amount of the assistance to 
the Party’s state -owned enterprises; or  
 (iv) otherwise favours the Party’s state -owned enterprises through 
the use of its discretion in the provision of assistance; 
 
“public service mandate” means a government m andate pursuant to which a 
state- owned enterprise makes available a service, directly or indirectly, to the 
general public in its territory;
6 
 “sovereign wealth fund” means an enterprise owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party that: 
 
(a) serves solely as a special purpose investment fund or arrangement
7 
for asset management, investment, and related activities, using financial assets of a Party; and  
 
(b) is a Member of the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds or endorses the Ge nerally Accepted Principles and Practices  
(“Santiago Principles”) issued by the International Working Group of Sovereign Wealth Funds, October 2008, or such other principles and practices as may be agreed to by the Parties,  
 
                                                      
5 In determining whether the assistance is provided “by virtue of that state -owned enterprise’s 
government ownership or control”, account  shall be taken of the extent of diversification of economic 
activities within the te rritory of the Party, as well as of the length of time during which the non-
commercial assistance programme has been in operation.  
6 For greater certainty, a service to the general public includes : (a) the distribution of goods ; and (b) 
the supply of general infrastructure services.  
7 For greater certainty, the Parties understand that the word “arrangement” as an alternative to “fund” 
allows for a flexible interpretation of the legal arrangement through which the assets can be invested.  and includes any special purpos e vehicles established solely for such 
activities described in subparagraph (a) wholly owned by the enterprise, or 
wholly owned by the Party but managed by the enterprise; and  “state- owned enterprise” means an enterprise that is principally engaged in 
commercial activities in which a Party:  
 
(a) directly owns more than 50 per cent of the share capital;  
 (b) controls, through ownership interests, the exercise of more than 50 per cent of the voting rights; or 
 (c) holds the power to appoint a majority of members of the board of directors or any other equ ivalent management body.   
  
Article 18.2 
Scope
8 
 1. This Chapter applies with respect to the activities of state -owned enterprises 
and designated monopolies of a Party that affect trade or investment between the Parties.
9 
 2. Nothing in this Chapter  shall prevent  a central bank or monetary authority of 
a Party from performing regulatory or supervisory activities or conducting monetary and related credit policy and exchange rate policy. 
 3. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent  a financial regulatory body of a Party, 
including a non-governmental body, such as a securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or association, from exercising regulatory or supervisory authority over  financial services 
suppliers. 
 4. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent  a Party, or one of its state enterprises or 
state- owned enterprises from undertaking activities for the purpose of the 
resolution of a failing or failed established financial service supplier or any 
other failing or failed enterprise principally engaged in the supply of financial 
services.  
 5. This Chapter does not apply with respect to a sovereign wealth fund of a Party, except: 
 
                                                      
8 For the purpo ses of this Chapter, the terms “financial service supplier”, “established financial service 
supplier” and “financial services ” have  the same meaning as in Article 9.1 (Definitions – Financial 
Services).  
9 This Chapter also applies with respect to the activities of state -owned enterprises of a Party that 
cause adverse effects in the market of a non -party as provided in Article 18.7 (Adverse Effects).  (a) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article  18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance) 
apply with respect to a Party’s indirect provision of non- commercial 
assistance through a sovereign wealth fund; and 
 
(b) Paragraph 2 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance) applies 
with respect to a sovereign wealth fund’s provision of non-
commercial assistance.  
 6. This Chapter does not apply with respect to:  
(a) an independent pension fund of a Party; or 
 
(b) an enterprise owned or controlled by an independent pension fund of a Party, except:  
 
(i) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance) apply with respect to a Party’s direct or indirect 
provision of non- commercial assistance to an enterprise 
owned or controlled by an independent pension fund; and 
 
(ii) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 18.6 (Non- commercial 
Assistan ce) apply with respect to a Party’s indirect provision 
of non- commercial assistance  through an enterprise owned or 
controlled by an independent pension fund. 
 7. This Chapter does not apply to: 
 
(a) government procurement; or  
(b) audio- visual services.  
 
8. Subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b) of Article 18.4 ( Non-discriminatory Treatment 
and Commercial Considerations ) do not apply where a state -owned enterprise 
accords more favourable treatment to Indigenous persons10 and organisations 
in the purchase of goods and services.  
 
9. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a state- owned enterprise of a Party from 
providing goods or services exclusively to that Party for the purposes of carrying out that Party’s governmental functions. 
 10. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from:  
 
(a) establishing or maintaining a state enterprise or a state -owned 
enterprise; or 
 (b) designating a monopoly.  
                                                      
10 For the purposes of this reservation, an Indigenous person means a person of the Aboriginal and 
Torres Stra it Islander peoples.   
11. Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations), Article 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) and Article 
18.10 (Transparency) do not apply to any service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority.
11 
 12. Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c) , 2(b) and 2(c)  of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations) do not  apply to the extent that a 
Party’s state -owned enterprise or designated monopoly makes purchases and 
sales of goods or services pursuant to:  
 
(a) any existing non- conforming measure that the Party maintains, 
continues, renews or amends in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 13.13 (Non -Conforming Measures - Investment), paragraph 1 
of Article 8.7 (Non- Conforming Measures – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services) or paragraph 1(a) to (c) of Article 9.10 (Non-Conforming 
Measures – Financial Services), as set out in its Schedule to Annex I 
(Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment) or in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III  (Schedules 
of Non-Conforming Measures for Financial Se rvices) ; or 
 
(b) any non- conforming measure that the Party adopts or maintains with 
respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article  13.13 (Non -Conforming Measures – 
Investment), paragraph 2 of Article 8.7 (Non -Confor ming Measures 
– Cross -Border Trade in Services) or paragraph 1(d) of Article 9.10 
(Non -Conforming Measures – Financial Services), as set out in its 
Schedule to Annex II (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for 
Services and Investment) or in Section B of its Schedule to Annex III  
(Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Financial Services) .   
 
 
Article 18.3 
Delegated Authority  
 
Each Party shall ensure that , when its state- owned enterprises, state 
enterprises and designated monopolies exercise any regulatory, 
administrative or other governmental authority that the Party has directed or delegated to such entities to carry out, those entities act in a manner th at is 
not inconsistent with that Party’s obligations under this Agreement.
12   
  
                                                      
11 For the purposes of this paragraph, “a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” 
has the same meaning as in GATS, including the meaning in the Financial Services Annex where applicable.  
12 Examples of regulatory, adm inistrative , or other governmental authority include the power to 
expropriate, grant licences, approve commercial transactions, or impose quotas, fees or other charges.  Article 18.4 
Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations  
 
1. Each Party shall ensure that each of its state- owned enterprises, when 
engaging in commercial activities:  
 
(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale of a good or service, except to fulfil any terms of its public service mandate that are not inconsistent with subparagraph (c)(ii);  
 (b) in its purchase of a good or service:  
 
(i) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of the other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party or of any non- party; and  
 
(ii) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a 
covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investmen ts of investors of the Party or of any 
non-party; and  
 
(c) in its sale of a good or service: 
 
(i) accords to an enterprise of the other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party  or of any 
non-party; and  
 (ii) accords to  an enterprise that is a covered investment in the 
Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party or of any non-party.
13 
 2. Each Party shall ensure that each of its designated monopolies: 
 
(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale of the monopoly good or service in the relevant market, except to fulfil any terms of its designation that are not inconsistent with subparagraph (b), (c) or (d); 
 
(b) in its purchase of the monopoly good or service: 
 
                                                      
13 Paragraph 1 of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Consideratio ns) shall 
not apply with respect to the purchase or sale of shares, stock or other forms of equity by a state-
owned enterprise as a means of its equity participation in another enterprise.  (i) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of the 
other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party  
or of any non- party; and  
 (ii) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party  or of any 
non-party; and  
 
(c)  in its sale of the monopoly good or service: 
 
(i) accords to an enterprise of the other Party treatment no  less 
favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party  or of any 
non-party; and  
 (ii) accords to an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises in the relevant market in  the Party’s territory that 
are investments of investors of the Party  or of any non- party; 
and 
 
(d) does not use its monopoly position to engage in, either directly or indirectly, including through its dealings with its parent, subsidiaries , 
or other entit ies the Party or the designated monopoly owns, 
anticompetitive practices in a non- monopolised market in its territory 
that negatively affect trade or investment between the Parties.
14 
 3. Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) and 2(c)  do not preclude a state -owned 
enterprise or designated monopoly from: 
 
(a) purchasing or selling goods or services on different terms or conditions including those relating to price; or 
 (b) refusing to purchase or sell goods or services,  
 provided that such differential treatment or refusal is undertaken in 
accordance with commercial considerations.  
  
                                                      
14 For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the requirements of this subparagraph through the 
enforcement or implementation of its generally applicable national competition laws and 
regulations, its economic regulatory laws and regulations, or other ap propriate measures.  Article 18.5 
Courts and Administrative  Bodies  
 
1. Each Party shall provide its courts with jurisdiction over civil claims against an enterprise owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign government based on a commercial activity carried on in its territory.
15  This 
shall not  be construed to require a Party to provide jurisdiction over such 
claims if it does not provide jurisdiction over similar claims against enterprises that are not owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign government. 
 2. Each Party shall ensure that any administrative body that the Party establishes or maintains that regulates a state- owned enterprise exercises its regulatory 
discretion in an impartial manner with respect to enterprises that it regulates, 
including enterprises that are not state- owned enterprises.
16 
  
Article 18.6 
Non-commercial Assistance  
 1. Neither Party shall cause
17 adverse  effects to the interests of the other Party 
through the use of non- commercial assistance that it provides, either directly 
or indirectly ,18 to any of its state- owned enterprises with respect to:  
 
(a) the production and sale of a good by the state-owned ent erprise;  
 (b) the supply of a service by the state- owned enterprise from the territory 
of the Party into the territory of the other Party; or 
 (c) the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party through an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the other Party.  
 2. Each Party shall ensure that its state enterprises and state -owned enterprises 
do not cause adverse effects to the interests of the other Party through the use of non- commercial assistance that the state enterprise or state -owned 
enterprise provides to any of its state -owned enterprises with respect to:  
 
                                                      
15 This paragrap h shall not be construed to preclude a Party from providing its courts with jurisdiction 
over claims against enterprises owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign government other than those claims referred to in this paragraph.  
16 For greater certainty, the impartiality with which an administrative body exercises its regulatory 
discretion is to be assessed by reference to a pattern or practice of that administrative body.  
17 For the purposes of paragr aphs 1 and 2, it must be demonstrated that the adverse effects claimed 
have been caused by the non -commercial assistance.  Thus, the non- commercial assistance must be 
examined within the context of other possible causal factors to ensure an appropriate att ribution of 
causality.  
18 For greater certainty, indirect provision includes the situation in which a Party entrusts or directs 
an enterprise that is not a state -owned enterprise to provide non -commercial assistance.  (a) the production and sale of a good by the state-owned enterprise; 
 
(b) the supply of a service by the state- owned enterprise from the territory 
of the Party into the territory of the other Party; or 
 (c) the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party through an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the other Party.  
 3. Neither Party shall cause injury to a domestic indu stry
19 of the other Party 
through the use of non- commercial assistance that it provides, either directly 
or indirectly, to any of its state -owned enterprises that is a covered investment 
in the territory of the other Party in circumstances where:  
 (a) the non- commercial assistance is provided with respect to the 
production and sale of a good by the state -owned enterprise in the 
territory of the other Party; and  
 (b) a like good is produced and sold in the territory of the other Party by the domestic industry of the other Party.
20 
 4. A service supplied by a state- owned enterprise of a Party within the Party’s 
territory shall be  deemed not to cause adverse effects.
21   
  
Article 18.7 
Adverse Effects  
 1. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), adverse effects arise if the effect of the non -commercial 
assistance is:  
 
(a) that the production and sale of a good by a Party’s state -owned 
enterprise that has received the non -commercial assistance displaces 
or impedes from the Party’s market imports of a like good of the other Party or sales of a like good produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the Party; 
 
                                                      
19 The term “domestic industry” refers to  the domestic producers as a whole of the like good, or to 
those domestic producers whose collective output of the like good constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of the like good, excluding the state -owned enterprise that is a co vered 
investment that has received the non -commercial assistance referred to in this paragraph.  
20 In situations of material retardation of the establishment of a domestic industry, it is understood 
that a domestic industry may not yet produce and sell the like good. However, in these situations, 
there must be evidence that a prospective domestic producer has made a substantial commitment to 
commence production and sales of the like good.  
21 For greater certainty, this paragraph  shall not be construed to appl y to a service that itself is a 
form of non -commercial assistance.  (b) that the production and sale of a good by a Party’s state -owned 
enterprise that has received the non- commercial assistance displaces 
or impedes from: 
 
(i) the market of the other Party sales of a like good produced by 
an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of 
that other Party; or  
 (ii) the market of a non- party imports of a like good of the other 
Party;  
 (c) a significant price undercutting by a good produced by a Party’s state -
owned enterprise that has received the non- commercial assistance and 
sold by the enterprise in:  
 
(i) the market of a Party as compared with the price in the same 
market of imports of a like good of the other Party or a like good that is produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the Party, or significant price suppression, price depression, or lost sales in the sam e market; 
or 
 (ii) the market of a non- party as compared with the price in the 
same market of imports of a like good of the other Party, or significant price suppression, price depression , or lost sales in 
the same market;  
 (d) that services supplied by a Party's state -owned enterprise that has 
received the non- commercial assistance displace or impede from the 
market of the other Party a like service supplied by a service supplier of the other Party; or  
 (e) a significant price undercutting by a service supplied in the market of the other Party by a Party’s state -owned enterprise that has received 
the non- commercial assistance as compared with the price in the same 
market of a like service supplied by a service supplier of the other Party, or significant pri ce suppression, price depression , or lost sales 
in the same market.
22 
 2. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1(a), 1(b) and 1(d), the displacing or 
impeding of a good or service includes any case in which it has been demonstrated that there has been a signif icant change in relative shares of the 
market to the disadvantage of the like good or like service.  “Significant 
change in relative shares of the market ” shall include any of the following 
                                                      
22 The purchase or sale of shares, stock or other forms of equity by a state -owned enterprise that has 
received non -commercial assistance as a means of its equity participation in another en terprise shall 
not be construed to give rise to adverse effects as provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 18.7 (Adverse  
Effects).  situations:  
 
(a) there is a significant increase in the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state-owned enterprise; 
 (b) the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state -owned 
enterprise remains constant in circumstances in which, in the absence of the non- commercial assistance, it would have d eclined 
significantly; or  
 (c) the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state -owned 
enterprise declines, but at a significantly slower rate than would have been the case in the absence of the non -commercial assistance.  
 
The change must manifest itself over an appropriately representative period sufficient to demonstrate clear trends in the development of the market for the good or service concerned, which, in normal circumstances, shall be at 
least one year.  
 
3. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1(c) and 1(e), price undercutting shall 
include  any case in which such price undercutting has been demonstrated 
through a comparison of the prices of the good or service of the state -owned 
enterprise with the prices of the like good or service.  
 
4. Comparisons of the prices in paragraph 3 shall be  made at the same level of 
trade and at comparable times, and due account shall be taken for factors 
affecting price comparability.  If a direct comparison of transactions is not 
possible, the existence of price undercutting may be demonstrated on some other reasonable basis, such as, in the case of goods, a comparison of unit values.  
 
5. Non-commercial assistance that a Party provides:  
 
(a) before the signing of this Agreement; or 
 (b) within three years  of signing of this Agreement, pursuant to a law that 
is enacted, or contractual obligation undertaken, prior to the signing of this Agreement, 
 shall be deemed not to cause adverse effects.  
 6. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1(b) and 2(b) of Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance), the initial capitalisation of a state -owned  enterprise, 
or the acquisition by a Party of a controlling interest in an enterprise, that is principally engaged in the supply of services within the territory of the Party, shall be deemed not to cause adverse effects.  Article 18.8 
Injury  
 
1. For the purposes of paragraph 3 of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), the term “injury” means material injury to a domestic industry, 
threat of material injury to a domestic industry , or material retardation of the 
establishment of such an industry.  A determination of material injury shall 
be based on positive evidence and involve an objective examination of the relevant factors, including the volume of production by the covered investment that has received non- commercial assistance, the effect of such 
production on prices for like goods produced and sold by the domestic industry, and the effect of such production on the domestic industry producing like goods.
23 
 2. With regard to the volume of production by the covered investment that has received non- commercial assistance, considerati on shall  be given as to 
whether there has been a significant increase in the volume of production, either in absolute terms or relative to production or consumption in the territory of the Party in which injury is alleged to have occurred.  With regard 
to the effect of the production by the covered investment on prices, consideration  shall be given as to whether there has been a significant price 
undercutt ing by the goods produced and sold by the covered investment as 
compared with the price of like goods produced and sold by the domestic industry, or whether the effect of production by the covered investment is otherwise to depress prices to a significant degree or to prevent price increases, which otherwise would have occurred, to a significant degree.  No 
one or several of these factors can necessarily give decisive guidance.  
 3. The examination of the impact on the domestic industry of the goods produced and sold by the covered investment that received the non-
commercial assistance shall include an evaluation of all relevant economic 
factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the industry, such as actual and potential decline in output, sales, market share, profits, productivity, return on investments, or utilisation of capacity; factors affecting domestic prices; actual and potential negative effects on cash flow, inventories, employment, wages, growth, ability to raise capital or investments , and, in 
the case of agriculture, whether there has been an increased burden on government support programmes.  This list is not exhaustive, nor can one or 
several of these factors necessarily give decisive guidance.  
 4. It must be demonstrated that the goods produced and sold by the covered investment are, through the effects
24 of the non- commercial assistance, 
causing injury within the meaning of this Article.  The demonstration of a 
causal relationship between the goods produced and sold by the covered 
                                                      
23 The periods for examination of the non -commercial assistance and injury shall be reasonably 
established and  shall end as clo sely as practical to the date of initiation of the proceeding before the 
panel.  
24 As set out in paragraphs 2 and 3.  investment and the injury to the domestic industry shall be based on an 
examination of all relevant evidence.  Any known factors other than the 
goods produced by the covered investment which at the same time are 
injuring the domestic industry  shall be examined , and the injuries caused by 
these other factors must not be attributed to the goods produced and sold by the covered investment that has received non -commercial assistance.   Factors 
which may be relevant in this respect include, among other things, the volumes and prices of other like goods in the market in question, contraction in demand or changes in the patterns of consumption, and developments in technology and the export performance and productivity of the domestic industry. 
 5. A determination of a t hreat of material injury shall be based on facts and not 
merely on allegation, conjecture , or remote possibility and shall  be 
considered with special care.  The change in circumstances which would 
create a situation in which non-c ommercial assistance to the covered 
investment would cause injury must be clearly foreseen and imminent.  In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, there should be consideration of relevant factors
25 and of whether the totality 
of the factors considered lead to the conclusion that further availability of goods produced by the covered investment is imminent and that, unless protective action is taken, material injury would occur.   
 
 
Article 18.9 
Application to Sub Central State -Owned Enterprises and Designated 
Monopolies 
 
Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations), Article 18.5 (Courts and Administrative Bodies), Article 
18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) and Article 18.10 (Transparency)  shall  
not apply with respect to a Party’s state -owned enterprises or designated 
monopolies as set out in Annex 18- D (Application to Sub- Central State-
Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies).   
  
   
                                                      
25 In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, a panel pursuant 
to Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) should consider, among other things, such factors as: (a) the nature 
of the non -commercial assistance in question and the trade effects likely to arise therefrom; (b) a 
significant rate of increase in sales in the domestic market by t he covered investment, indicating a 
likelihood of substantially increased sales; (c) sufficient freely disposable, or an imminent, substantial increase in, capacity of the covered investment indicating the likelihood of substantially increased 
production of the good by that covered investment, taking into account the availability of export 
markets to absorb additional production; (d) whether prices of goods sold by the covered investment will have a significant depressing or suppressing effect on the price of like goods; and (e) inventories 
of like goods.  Article 18.10  
Transparency  
 
1. Each Party shall provide to the other Party or otherwise make publicly 
available on an official website a list of its state -owned enterprises no later 
than six months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and 
thereafter shall update the list annually.  
 2. E ach Party shall promptly notify the other Party or otherwise make publicly 
available on an official website the designation of a monopoly or expansion of the scope of an existing monopoly and the terms of its designation. 
 3. On the written request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide the following information concerning a state -owned enterprise or a government 
monopoly, provided that the request includes an explanation of how the activities of the entity may be affecting trade or investment b etween the 
Parties:  
 (a) the percentage of shares that the Party, its state -owned enterprises or 
designated monopolies cumulatively own, and the percentage of votes that they cumulatively hold, in the entity;  
 (b) a description of any special shares or special voting or other rights that the Party, its state -owned enterprises or designated monopolies 
hold, to the extent these rights are different than the rights attached to the general common shares of the entity; 
 (c) the government titles of any government official serving as an officer or member of the entity’s board of directors; 
 (d) the entity’s annual revenue and total assets over the most recent three -
year period for which information is available; 
 (e) any exemptions and immunities from which the entity benefits under the Party’s law; and  
 (f) any additional information regarding the entity that is publicly available, including annual financial reports and third- party audits, 
and that is sought in the written  request.  
 4. On the written request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide, in writing, information regarding any policy or programme it has adopted or maintains that provides for non- commercial assistance, provided that the 
request includes an explanation of how the policy or programme affects or could affect trade or investment between the Parties.  
 5. When a Party provides a response pursuant to paragraph 4, the information it provides shall be sufficiently specific to enable the requesting Party to  understand the operation of and evaluate the policy or programme and its 
effects or potential effects on trade or investment between the Parties.  The 
Party responding to a request shall ensure that the response it provides contains the following information: 
 (a) the form of the non- commercial assistance provided under the policy 
or programme, for example, grant or loan; 
 (b) the names of the government agencies, state- owned enterprises, or 
state enterprises providing the non- commercial assistance  and the 
names of the state- owned enterprises that have received or are eligible 
to receive the non- commercial assistance;  
 (c) the legal basis and policy objective of the policy or programme providing for the non- commercial assistance;  
 (d) with respect t o goods, the amount per unit of the non- commercial 
assistance or, in cases where this is not possible, the total amount or the annual amount budgeted for the non- commercial assistance, 
indicating, if possible, the average amount per unit in the previous year; 
 (e) with respect to services, the total amount or the annual amount budgeted for the non- commercial assistance, indicating, if possible, 
the total amount in the previous year; 
 (f) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non- commercial 
assistance in the form of loans or loan guarantees, the amount of the loan or amount of the loan guaranteed, interest rates, and fees charged;  
 (g) with respect to policies or programmes p roviding for non- commercial 
assistance in the form of the provision of goods or services, the prices charged, if any;  
 (h) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non- commercial 
assistance in the form of equity capital, the amount invested, the number and a description of the shares received, and any assessments that were conducted with respect to the underlying investment decision; 
 (i) the duration of the policy or programme or any other time -limits 
attached to it; and  
 (j) statistical data permitting an assessment of the effects of the non -
commercial assistance on trade or investment between the Parties.  
 6. If a Party considers that it has not adopted or does not maintain any policies or programmes referred to in paragraph 4, it shall so inform the requesting  Party in writing.  
 
7. If any relevant points in paragraph 5 have not been addressed in the written response, an explanation shall be provided in the written response itself. 
 8. The Parties recognise that the provision of information under paragraphs 5 and 7 does not prejudge the legal status of the assistance that was the subject of the request under paragraph 4 or the effects of that assistance under this Agreement.  
 9. When a Party provides written information pursuant to a request under this Article and informs the requesting Party that it considers the information to be confidential, the requesting Party shall not disclose the information without the prior consent of the Party providing the information.   
  
Article 18.11 
Cooperation 
 1. The Parties recognise the importance of the development of transparent, robust and effective international trade rules to ensure open and fair competition between state -owned and privately- owned enterprises in global 
trade.  The Parties also recognise t he importance of addressing trade -
distorting practices by state -owned enterprises, including the provision of 
non-commercial assistance that impairs the proper functioning of markets.  
The Parties further recognise the role of relevant international standa rds, 
including the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State -Owned 
Enterprises, adopted by the OECD Council  on 8 July 2015 in developing 
such rule s. 
 2. Accordingly, the Parties shall, where appropriate and subject to available resources, engage in mutually agreed technical cooperation activities, including: 
 
(a) cooperating in international fora that deal with regulation of state -
owned enterprises in global trade, including in particular the  WTO 
and the OECD;  
 (b) exchanging information regarding each Party’s e xperiences in 
improving the corporate governance and operation of their state -
owned enterprises; 
 (c) sharing best practices on policy approaches to ensure a level playing field between state -owned and privately owned enterprises, including 
policies related to competitive neutrality; and  (d) organising international seminars, workshops , or any other 
appropriate forum for sharing technical information and expertise 
related to the governance and operations of state-owned enterprises.   
  
Article 18.12 
Contact Points  
 
Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point on State -Owned 
Enterprises  and Designated Monopolies to facilitate communications 
between the Parties on any  matter covered by this Chapter.    
  
Article 18.13 
Exceptions  
 1. Nothing in Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations) or Article 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) shall be 
construed to:  
 
(a) prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party  of measures to 
respond temporarily to a national or global economic emergency; or 
 
(b) apply to a state -owned enterprise with respect to which a Party has 
adopted or enforced measures on a temporary basis in response to a national or global economic emergency, for the duration of that emergency.  
 2. Paragraph 1 of Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations) does not apply with respect to the supply of financial services 
by a state -owned enterprise pursuant to a government mandate if that supply 
of financial services:  
 
(a) supports exports or imports, provided that these services are: 
 (i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or 
 (ii) offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market;
26 
 
                                                      
26 In circumstances where no comparable financial services are offered in the commercial market: (a) 
for the  purposes of subparagraphs 2(a)(ii), 2(b)(ii), 3(a)(ii) and 3(b)(ii), the state -owned enterprise 
may rely as necessary on available evidence to establish a benchmark of the terms on which such 
services would be offered in the commercial market; and (b) for the purposes of subparagraphs 2(a)(i), 2(b)(i), 3(a)(i) and 3(b)(i), the supply of the financial services shall be deemed not to be intended to 
displace commercial financing.  (b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided 
that these services are:  
 (i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or  
 (ii) offered on terms no more favourable than those  that could be 
obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or  
 
(c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided that it falls within the scope of the Arrangement. 
 3. The supply of financial services by a state -owned enterprise pursuant to a 
government mandate shall be deemed not to give rise to adverse effects under 
subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) or 2(c) of Article 18.6 (Non- commercial 
Assistance) where the Party in which the financial  service is supplied requires 
a local presence in order to supply those services, if that supply of financial services:
27 
 (a) supports exports and imports, provided that these services are: 
 
(i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or 
 (ii) offer ed on terms no more favourable than those that could be 
obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market;  
 (b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided that these services are:  
 
(i) not intended to displace commercial financing; or  
 (ii) offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or  
 (c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided that it falls wi thin the scope of the Arrangement. 
 4. Article 18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance) does  not apply with respect to an 
enterprise located outside the territory of a Party over which a state- owned 
enterprise of that Party has assumed temporary ownership as a consequence of foreclosure or a similar action in connection with defaulted debt, or payment of an insurance claim by the state -owned enterprise, associated with 
                                                      
27 For the purposes of this paragraph, in cases where the Party in which the financial service is supplied 
requires a local presence in order to supply those services, the supply of the financial services identified in this paragraph through an enterprise that is a covered investment  shall be  deemed to not 
give rise to adverse effects.  the supply of the financial services referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, provided 
that any support the Party, a state enterprise or state- owned enterprise of the 
Party, provides to the enterprise during the period of temporary ownership is provided in order to rec oup the state -owned enterprise’s investment in 
accordance with a restructuring or liquidation plan that will result in the ultimate divestiture from the enterprise.  
 5. Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial 
Considerations), Article 18.6 (Non -commercial Assistance),  and Article 
18.10 (Transparency)  do not apply with respect to a state -owned enterprise 
or designated monopoly if in any one of the three previous consecutive fiscal years, the annual revenue derived from the commercial activities of the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly was less than a threshold amount which shall be calculated in accordance with Annex 18-A (Threshold 
Calculation) .
28   
  
Article 18.14 
Further Negotiations  
   Within five years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, 
the Parties shall conduct further negotiations on extending the application of the disciplines in this Chapter in accordance with Annex 18- C (Further 
Negotiations).   
  
Article 18.15 
Proc ess for Developing Information  
   Annex 18- B (Process for Developing Information Concerning State -
Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies) applies in any dispute under 
Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) regarding a Party’s conformity with  Article 
18.4 (Non- discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or 
Article 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) .   
                                                      
28 When a Party invokes this exception during consultations under Article 30.7 (Consultations – 
Dispute Settlement), the consulting Parties should exchange and discuss available evidence 
concerning the annual revenue of the state -owned enterprise or the designated monopoly derived from 
the commercial activities during the three previous consecutive fisc al years in an effort to resolve 
during the consultations period any disagreement regarding the application of this exception.  ANNEX 18-A 
THRESHOLD CALCULATION 
 
1. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the threshold referred to in paragraph 5 of Article 18.13 (Exceptions ) shall be 200 million Special 
Drawing Rights (SDRs).  
 2. The amount of the threshold shall  be adjusted at three- year intervals with each 
adjustment taking effect on 1 January.  The first adjustment shall take place 
on the first 1 January following the entry into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the formula set out in this Annex. 
 3. The threshold shall be adjusted for changes in general price levels using a 
composite SDR inflation rate, calculated as a weighted sum of cumulative per cent changes in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) deflators of SDR component currencies over the three -year period ending 30 June of the year 
prior to the adjustment taking effect, and using the following formula: 
 
𝑇𝑇1 = (1 + Σ w𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆  . Π𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆))𝑇𝑇0 
 
where:  
 
𝑇𝑇0 = threshold value at base period; 
𝑇𝑇1 = new (adjusted) threshold value; 
w𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆   = respective (fixed) weights of each currency, 𝑖𝑖 , in the SDR 
(as at  30 June of the year prior to adjustment taking effect); 
and 
Π𝑖𝑖𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆  = cumulative per cent change in the GDP deflator of  each 
currency, 𝑖𝑖, in the SDR over the three -year period ending 30 
June of the year prior to adjustment taking effect. 
 
4. Each Party shall convert the threshold into national currency terms where the conversion rates  shall be the average of monthly values of that Party’s 
national currency in SDR terms over the three -year period to 30 June of the 
year before the threshold is to take effect.  Each Party shall notify the other 
Party of its applicable threshold in their respective national currencies.  
 5. For the purposes of this Chapter, all data  shall be drawn from the International 
Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database.  
 6. The Parties shall consult if a major change in a national currency vis-à-vis the SDR were to create a significant problem with regard to the application of this Chapter.  ANNEX 18-B 
 
PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING INFORMATION CONCERNING STATE-
OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES  
 
1. If a panel has been established pursuant to Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) 
to examine a complaint arising under Article 18.4 (Non- discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance) , the Parties may exchange written questions and 
responses, as set forth in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, to obtain information relevant to the complaint that is not otherwise readily available.  
 2. A Party (questioning Party) may provide written questions to the other Party 
(answering Party) within 15 days of the date the panel  is established.  The 
answering Party shall provide its responses to the questions to the questioning Party within 30 days of the date it receives the questions.  
 3. The questioning Party may provide any follow -up written questions to the 
answering Party within 15 days of the date it receives the responses to the initial questions.  The answering Party shall provide its responses to the 
follow- up questions to the questioning Party within 30 days of the date it 
receives the follow -up questions. 
 4. If the questioning Party considers that the answering Party has failed to cooperate in the information- gathering process under this Annex, the 
questioning Party shall inform the panel and the answering Party in writing within 30 days of the date the responses to the questioning Party’s final questions are due, and provide the basis for its view.  The panel shall afford 
the answering Party an opportunity to reply in writing. 
 5. A Party that provides written questions or responses to the other Party pursuant to these procedures shall, on the same day, provide the questions or answers to the panel.  
 6. The answering Party may designate information in its responses as confidential information in accordance with the procedures set out in the 
Rules of Procedure established in accordance with subparagraph 1(e ) of 
Article  30.2 (Functions of the Joint Committee  – Administrative and 
Institutional Provisions ) or other rules of procedure agreed to by the Parties.  
 7. The time periods in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 may be modified upon agreement of the Parties or approval by the panel. 
 8. In determining whether a Party has failed to cooperate in the information-gathering process, the panel shall take into account the reasonableness of the 
questions and the efforts the answering Party has made to respond to the questions in a cooperative and timely manner.  9. I n making findings of fact and its initial report, the panel should draw adverse 
inferenc es from instances of non- cooperation by a Party in the information -
gathering process. 
 
10. The panel may deviate from the time period set out in Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement) for the issuance of the initial report if necessary  to accommodate 
the information -gathering process. 
 11. The panel may seek additional information from a Party that was not provided to the panel through the information- gathering process where the panel 
considers the information necessary to resolve the d ispute.  However, the 
panel shall not request additional information to complete the record where the information would support a Party’s position and the absence of that information in the record is the result of that Party’s non -cooperation in the 
inform ation -gathering process.  ANNEX 18-C 
 
FURTHER NEGOTIATIONS  
 
  Within five years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, 
the Parties shall conduct further negotiations on extending the application of:  
 
(a) the disciplines in this Chapter to the activities of state-owned 
enterprises that are owned or controlled by a sub- central level of 
government, and designated monopolies designated by a sub- central 
level of government, where such activities have been listed in Annex 18-D (Application to Sub- Central State -Owned Enterprises and 
Designated Monopolies); and  
 (b) the disciplines in Articl e 18.6 (Non- commercial Assistance) and 
Article  18.7 (Adverse Effects) to address effects caused, in a market 
of a non-Party, by the supply of services by a state-owned enterprise.  ANNEX 18-D 
 
APPLICATION TO SUB- CENTRAL  
STATE- OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES  
 
 
Pursuant to Article 18.9 (Application to Sub Central State -Owned 
Enterprises and Designated Monopolies ), the following obligations shall not 
apply with respect to a state -owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sub-
central level of government and a designated monopoly designated by a sub-
central level of government:29 
 (a) For Australia:  
 
(i) paragraphs 1(a) and (b) of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations);  
 (ii) paragraph 2 of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment 
and Commercial Considerations); 
 (iii) subparagraphs 1(a) and 2(a) of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Australia;  
 (iv) s ubparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) and 2(c) of Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance) ; and  
 
(v) paragraph 1 of Article 18. 10 (Transparency). 
 (b) For the UK:  
 
(i) paragraphs 1(a) and (b) of Article 18.4 (Non-discriminatory 
Treatment and Commercial Considerations);  
 (ii) paragraph 2 of Article 18.4 (Non -discriminatory Treatment 
and Commercial Considerations);  
 (iii) subparagraphs 1(a) and 2(a) of Article 18.6 (Non -commercial 
Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the te rritory of the UK;  
 (iv) s ubparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 2(b) and 2(c) of Article 18.6 (Non -
commercial Assistance) ; and  
 
                                                      
29 For the purposes of this Annex, “sub -central level of government” means the regional level of 
government and the local level of  government of a Party.  (v) paragraph 1 of Article 18. 10 (Transparency).