  CHAPTER 20 
 
INNOVATION 
 
 
Article 20.1 
Definitions  
 
 For the purposes of this Chapter:  “innovation” means the development or implementation of a new or 
improved product, process, or organisational method, or combination thereof. 
  
Article 20.2 
Objective  
 
 The objective of this Chapter is to support trade and economic growth 
between  the Parties t hrough collaboration on innovation, consistent with the 
laws, regulations and policies of each Party . 
  
Article 20.3 
General Provisions 
 1. The Parties recognise the important role that innovation plays in their economies, including by stimulating competitiveness, increasing productivity, encourag ing investment and promoting international trade. 
 2.
 The Parties confirm that their intention is for this Agreement to support 
innovation in their respective economies, including by fostering  
opportunities in innovation- intensive industries and encouraging trade in 
innovative goods and services.  
 3. T he Parties acknowledge the existing collaboration on innovation between 
their governments, industries, universities, publicly funded research agencies and other non- governmental bodies, and confirm their commitment to further 
strengthening this collaboration. 
  
Article 20.4 
Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technologies  
 1. The Parties recognise that emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence  and other digital technologies , are becoming increasingly 
important within the global economy, and offer significant social and economic benefits.   
2. The Parties shall cooperate, where appropriate through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue established pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 20.5 
(Strategic Innovation Dialogue) , in activities aimed at encouraging the 
development and adoption of emerging technologies , and facilitating trade in 
related products and services.  Those activities may include:  
 
(a) sharing research and industry practices related to emerging technologies and their governance; 
 
(b) promoting and sustaining the responsible use and adoption of emerging technologies by businesses and across the community; 
 
(c) encouraging commercialisatio n opportunities and collaboration 
between research institutions, industries and businesses related to emerging technologies;  
 
(d) playing an active role in the development of international standards, regulations and conformity assessment procedures that p rovide clear 
expectations for businesses and support the growth of emerging technologies; 
 
(e) facilitating and promoting investment in research and development related to emerging technologies; and 
 
(f) facilitating and promoting trade in emerging technologies, including by exchanging views on effective trade policy approaches.  
 3. The Parties also recognise the importance of developing governance frameworks for the trusted, safe, and responsible use of emerging technologies that will help realise the benefits of these technologies.  The 
Parties further acknowledge the benefits of en suring that those  frameworks 
are internationally aligned as far as possible.
  To this end, the Parties shall 
endeavour to:  
 
(a) collaborate on , and promote the  development and adoption of , 
governance frameworks that support the trusted, safe, and responsible use of emerging technologies, through relevant international fora, in particular the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence; and  
 
(b) take into consideration  internationally  recognised principles or 
guidelines, in particular the Organisa tion for Economic Cooperation 
and Development’s Principles on Artificial Intelligence  adopted by 
its Council on 22 May 2019, when developing those  frameworks.  Article 20.5 
Strategic Innovation Dialogue 
 
1. The Parties hereby establish a Strategic Innovation Dialogue for the purposes of facilitating an open business environment that supports and stimulates innovation in their territories, promoting and strengthening trade -facilitative 
innovation policy, ident ifying unnecessary barriers to trade in innovative 
goods and services, and identifying other opportunities  to further the 
objective of this Chapter. 
 2. Through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue, the Parties shall mutually identify areas of cooperation to promote and facilitate innovation in their territories.  Examples of areas of cooperation may include:  (a) regulatory approaches that facilitate innovation, including the uptake and implementation of international innovation best practice standards;  
 
(b) emerging and transformative technologies , including  clean and low 
emissions technologies, artificial intelligence , and other digital 
technologies; 
 
(c) the commercial application of new technologies, including in 
economic sectors such as agriculture, health, energy, mineral 
resources, space, and manufacturing; 
 
(d) value chain matters, including supply chain resilience ; and 
 
(e) global innovation networks and cross -border trade in intangible 
assets, including through higher education and research collaboration . 
 3. Through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue, the Parties shall:  
(a) share best practice principles and explore opportunities in innovation policy across government, academia, research organisations, industry and business; 
 (b) review existing relationships for opportunities to strengthen bilateral engagement on the impacts of innovation on trade and investment;  
 (c) explore ways in which innovation can further promote trade and investment; and 
 (d) consider any other matter that the Parties  deem appropriate which 
furthers the objective  of this Chapter.  4. Consistent with the objective of this Chapter, the Strategic Innovation 
Dialogue may develop a cooperative activity between the Parties in an area of mutual interest.  
 5. The Parties may consult  with or seek advice from a qualified non-
governmental expert  or stakeholde r in relation to furthering the objective of 
this Chapter , including by inviting them to participate in the Strategic 
Innovation Dialogue.  
 6. The Strategic Innovation Dialogue shall be co- chaired by a representative 
from each Party.  
 7. The Strategic Innovation Dialogue shall convene within 12 months of the 
date of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter  at least once every 
two years,  unless the Par ties agree otherwise. 
 8 Each Party shall, on entry into force of this Agreement, designate a contact 
point for the Strategic Innovation Dialogue and notify the other Party of that 
contact point .  Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change 
to those contact details.  
 9.  The Strategic Innovation Dialogue may engage with any committee, working group, or other subsidiary body established  under this Agreement to further 
the objective of this Chapter.
1 
 10. The Joint Committee may refer a matter to the Strategic Innovation Dialogue 
for its consideration. 
  
Article 20.6 
Review  of this Agreement  
 
1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring that the disciplines contained in this Agreement remain relevant to the trade and investment issues and challenges confronting them, including those arising from innovation. 
 2. Where a review is conducted pursuant to paragraph 1 and in accordance with 
subparagraph 3(a) of Article 32.6 ( General Review  – Final Provisions ), the 
Parties shall take into account developments in innovation, including as 
discussed through the Strategic Innovation Dialogue. 
  
                                                            
1 The Strategic Innovation Dialogue shall not be considered a committee, working group , or other 
subsidiary body established under this Agreement for the purposes of Chapter 29 (Administrative and 
Institutional Arrangements) .  Article 20.7 
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.