  CHAPTER 23 
 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
Article 23.1 
General Provisions 
 1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of development in promoting inclusive economic growth, as well as the instrumental role that trade and investment can play in contributing to economic development and prosperity.  Inclusive economic growth includes a more broad- based distribution of the 
benefits of economic growth through the expansion of business and industry, the creat ion of jobs, and the alleviation of poverty. 
 2. The Parties acknowledge that effective domestic coordination of trade, investment, and development policies can contribute to  inclusive economic 
growth for developing countries.   
 3. The Parties affirm the importance of increased participation of developing countries in the global economy and recognise the vital contribution of the World Trade Organization to trade and development.   
  
Article 23.2 
Joint Development Activities  
 1. The Parties recognise the value in undertaking joint development activities relating to trade and investment, which may include: 
 
(a)  an exchange of information between the Parties, relating to experience, cooperation, best practice, technical assistance, or capacity building; 
 
(b)  mutually agreed cooperation, technical assistance, or capacity building on issues such as customs procedures, trade facilitation, technical barriers to trade, trade in services, or digital trade;  
 
(c)  mutually agreed cooperation in international fora; 
 
(d)  inviting, as appropriate, the assistance of relevant international institutions, private sector entities, non- governmental organisations, 
or other institutions; or  
 
(e)  an exchange of views on methodologies  for monitoring the 
implementation and operation of this Chapter.  
 2. Each Party may monitor and assess the role this Agreement  plays in relation 
to development, subject to its laws, regulations, policies, and practices. 
 
 
Article 23.3 
Committee on Cooperation  
  The Committee on Cooperation established under Article 27.4 (Committee 
on Cooperation - Cooperation) shall consider any matter under this Chapter related 
to cooperation and support  any activit ies pursuant to Article 23 .2 (Joint Development 
Activities).  
  
 Article 23.4 
Non-Application  of Dispute Settlement  
  Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 30 
(Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.