  
 CHAPTER 24 
 
TRADE AND GENDER EQUALITY  
 
 
Article 24.1 
Objectives  
 1.  The Parties acknowledge the importance of advancing gender equality for inclusive economic growth and that gender -responsive policies are important 
for ensuring equitable participation in domestic, regional and global economies.  
 2.  Accordingly, the Parties recognise the importance of advancing  gender 
equality and women’ s economic empowerment across this Agreement  and 
agree to incorporate gender perspectives in their trade and investment 
relationship.  
 3.  The Parties affirm their commitment to the WTO Joint Ministerial 
Declaration on Trade and Women’s Economic Empowerment made at the 11
th WTO Ministerial Conference in Buenos Aires in December 2017 and 
acknowledge the work of other multilateral fora, such as the  Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development , in advancing the evidence  base 
on women’s economic empowerment and trade. 
 4.  The Parties acknowledge that, in addition to the provisions in this Chapter, there are provisions in other Chapters of this Agreement that seek to advance gender equality and women’s economic empowerment in the context of trade and investment  including in relation to services, SMEs , financial services, 
procurement, labour, and digital trade . 
 5.  The Parties recognise the importance of evidence-based interventions and 
measures that facilitate  women’s full access to and ability to benefit from this 
Agreement . 
 6.  The Parties further recognise the benefits of sharing their experiences in designing, implementing, resourcing and strengthening policies, programmes 
and other initiatives to  advance gender equality and address the systemic and 
other barriers which prevent women, including as workers, business owners 
and entrepreneurs, from participating equitably in all aspects of trade.  
 Article 24.2 
Trade and Gender Equality Cooperation Activities  
 
1.  T he Parties shall undertake cooperation activities, as appropriate , that support  
women workers, business owners and entrepreneurs to access the full benefits and opportunities created by this A greement .  
 2.  The Parties recognise the importance of carrying out the cooperation activities with the inclusive participation of women.  
  3.  Cooperation activities that may be undertaken by the Parties include, but are not limited to, exchanging information, experiences and evidence relating to:  
 
(a)  programmes and initiatives aimed at improving the access of women to markets,  technology and financing;   
 
(b)  promoting equal opportunities for women in the workplace, including workplace flexibility ; 
 
(c)  the development and strengthening of women's leadership and business networks;  
 
(d)  improving the access of women and girls to leadership opportunities and education, including in fields in which they are under -
represented, such as science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, insofar as those activities are related to trade;  
  (e)  trade missions for businesswomen and women entrepreneurs;   
 
(f)  collaborating, including with developing countries and in multilateral fora, to promote equitable participation of women in supply chains; and  
 
(g) enabling women’s access to online business tools  and opportunities 
to strengthen digital skills , and identifying and addressing barriers to 
women accessing digital trade.  
 4.  To support achievement of the objectives of this Chapter, the Parties shall cooperate and exchange information on the integration of gender in 
approaches to data collection, analysis and monitoring, as agreed by the 
Parties, which may include: 
 
(a)  methods and procedures for the collection of sex- disaggregated data, 
the use of indicators, monitoring and evaluation methodologies, and the analysis of gender statistics related to trade;  
 
(b)  conducting gender analyses  of trade policies, incorporating both 
quantitative and qualitative data  and information, and for the  
 monitoring of their effects on women as workers, entrepreneurs and 
business-owners; or  
 
(c)  undertaking research on trade and gender equality where appropriate . 
  
Article 24.3 
Dialogue on Trade and Gender Equality  
 
1.  The Parties agree to establish a Dialogue on Trade and Gender Equality  (the 
Dialogue) composed of government representatives from each Party.  
Meetings of the Dialogue shall take place by agreement of the Parties.  
  2.  The Dialogue may consider any matter that the Parties consider appropriate 
to advance gender equality and women’s economic empowerment in the Parties’ trade and investment relationship.   The Committee on Cooperation 
shall consider any matter under this Chapter  related to cooperation and 
support any cooperation activities.  
  3.  The Dialogue may engage and facilitate communication with relevant stakeholders which may include women workers, business owners and entrepreneurs, in its consideration of matters releva nt to this Chapter.  
  4.  The Dialogue shall report on the progress of its work to the Committee on Cooperation established under paragraph 1 of Article 27.4 ( Committee on 
Cooperation – Cooperation), while seeking to avoid duplication of its work.  
 5.  The Dialogue may work with other bodies and subsidiary bodies established 
under this Agreement to advance the objectives of this Chapter and support the delivery of the cooperative activities described in Article 24.2 ( Trade and 
Gender Equality Cooperation Activities ), which may include providing 
advice or recommendations to the Joint Committee as appropriate.  
 
 
Article 24.4 
Non-application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.