  CHAPTER 30  
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT  
 
 
Article 30.1 
Definitions  
 
  For the purposes of this Chapter:  “cases of urgency” means those cases which concern good s that rapidly lose 
their quality,  current condition, or commercial value in a short period of time;  
 “Code of Conduct ” means the code of conduct referred to in Article 30.13 
(Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct) and annexed to the Rules of Procedure;  “complaining Party” means the Party that requests the consultations under 
Article 30.7 (Consultations);  
 “panel” means a panel established under Article 30.8 ( Request for 
Establishment of a Panel)  or reconvened under Articles 30.1 5 (Compliance 
Review), 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non -Compliance), or 30.17 
(Compliance Review after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies);  “responding Party” means the Party to which a request for consultations is 
made under Article 30.7 (Consultations); and  
 “Rules of Procedure ” means the rules of procedure referred to in Article 
30.13 (Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct) and  established in 
accordance with Article 29.2.1(e) (Functions of the Joint Committee – 
Administrative and Institutional Provisions).   
  
Article 30.2 
Objective  
 
  The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient , and 
transparent process for the avoidance and settlement of any disputes arising  
between the Parties under this Agreement. 
  
Article 30.3 
Cooperation 
 
  The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation 
and application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation and consultations  to arrive at a mutually agreed  solution with 
respect to  any matter that might affect its operation or application.   
 
Article 30.4 
Scope  
 
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement when a Party considers that :  
 (a) an actual or proposed measure of the other Party is or would be inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement; or 
 
(b) the other Party has  otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under 
this Agreement .  
 2. This Chapter applies subject to such special and additional provisions on dispute settlement contained in other Chapters of this Agreement. 
 3. Subject to Article 30.5 (Choice of Forum), this Chapter shall be without 
prejudice to the rights of a Party to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures available under any other international agreement to which the Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement .  
  
Article 30.5 
Choice of Forum  
 1. If a dispute arises regarding  a right or obligation under this Agreement and a 
substantially equivalent right or obligation under another international  
agreement to which the Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute.  The 
forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of other fora
1, unless that forum 
fails to make findings on the merits of the claim for jurisdictional or procedural reasons. 
 2. For the  purposes of this Article, the complaining Party shall be deemed to 
have selected the forum in which to settle the dispute when it has requested the establishment of a panel pursuant to  paragraph 1  of Article 30.8 (Request 
for Establishment of a Panel) or requested the establishment of, or referred a matter to, a dispute settlement panel under another international  agreement.  
Where panel procedures are not provided for under another international  
agreement, the complaining Party shall be deemed to have sel ected the forum 
when it commences a dispute under the dispute settlement procedures in the relevant international agreement.   
 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, the exclusion of other fora includes the exclusion of consultations in those 
fora.   
Article 30.6 
Good Offices, Conciliation , and Mediation  
 
1. The Parties may at any time agree to voluntarily undertake an alternative method of dispute resolution, such as good offices, conciliation, or mediation.  
 2. Procedures undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1  and, in particular, positions 
taken by the Parties during these procedures shall be confidential and without preju dice to the rights of a Party in any further or other proceedings.  
 3. A Party may suspend or terminate the procedures undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 at any time.  
 4. If the Parties agree, procedures undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 may 
continue while the dispute proceeds for resolution before a panel. 
  
Article 30.7 
Consultations  
 
1. A Party may request consultations with the other Party with respect to any 
matter described in Article 30.4 (Scope).  The Party making the request for 
consultations shall do so in writing, and shall set out the reasons for the 
request, including identification of the actual or proposed measure
2 or other 
matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint.  
 2. The responding Party shall  reply in writing to the request no later than 10 
days after receipt of the request and enter into consultations in good faith.  
 3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they  shall enter into consultations no later 
than 30 days after receipt of the request. 
 4. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to the Parties.  If the consultations are held in person, they shall be held in the 
capital  of the responding Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  
 5. The Parties shall make every attempt to reach a mutually agreed solution through consultations under this Article.  To this end, each Party shall :  
 
(a)  provide sufficient factual  information to enable a full examination of 
how the matter subject to consultations might affect the operation or 
application of this Agreement;  
 
                                                            
2 The Parties shall, in the case of a proposed measure, make every effort to make the request for 
consultation under this provision within 60 days of publication of the proposed measure, without 
prejudice to the right to make such request at any time.  (b)  treat as confidential any information or material exchanged in the 
course of the consultations that is designated as confidential by the 
Party providing the information or ma terial ; and  
 (c) endeavour to ensure the participation of personnel of their competent 
governmental authorities or other regulatory bodies who have responsibility for or expertise in the matter subject to the 
consultations. 
 6. In consultations under this Article, a Party may request that the other Party make available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have expertise in the matter at issue.  
 7. Consultations and, in particular, positions taken b y the Parties during 
consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of a 
Party in any further or other proceedings. 
  
Article 30.8 
Request for Establishment of a Panel  
 
1. The complaining Party may request the establishment of a panel if: 
 
(a)  the other Party does not reply to a request for, or enter into, consultations within the time period specified in paragraph 3 of 
Article 30.7 (Consultations);  
 (b) the Parties agree not to enter into consultations; or 
 (c) the Parties fail  to resolve  the matter  through consultations within  60 
days of receipt of the request for consultations under paragraph 1 of 
Article 30.7 (Consultations). 
 2. The request for establishment of a panel shall be made in writing to the responding Party.  In the request the complaining Party shall set out the 
reasons for the request, including identification of the specific measure or 
other matter at issue and the legal basis for the complaint , including the 
provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been br eached  and to be 
addressed by the panel, sufficient to present the problem clearly.  
 3. A panel shall not be established to review a proposed measure.  Article 30.9 
Establishment and Reconvening of Panels  
 
1. Where a Party makes a request for the establishment of a panel pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 30 .8 (Request for Establishment of a Panel), a panel 
shall be established in accordance with this Article.   
 2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, a panel shall consist of three panellists.  
All nominations and appointments of panellists under this Article shall conform fully with the requirements in Article 30.10 (Qualifications of 
Panellists).  
 3. Within five days of receipt by the responding Party of a request under Article 30.8 (Request for Establishment of a Panel), the Parties shall enter into 
consultations with a view to reaching agreement on the composition of the panel, taking into account th e factual, technical , and legal circumstances of 
the dispute.  
 4. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on the composition of the panel within 10 days of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 3, a Party may, at any time thereafter, notify  the other Party that it wishes to use the 
procedures set forth in paragraphs 5 through 7.  If such a notification is made, 
the panel shall be composed in accordance with paragraphs 5 through 7. 
 5. Each Party shall appoint one panellist within 20 days  of receipt of the 
notification  referred to  in paragraph 4.  For greater certainty, a national of a 
Party may be appointed.  If the complaining Party fails to appoint its panellist, 
the dispute settlement proceedings shall lapse.    
 6. The Parties shall , within 35 days of receipt of the notification referred to in 
paragraph 4, agree on the appointment of the third panellist who shall serve as the chair of the panel.  To assist in reaching this agreement, each Party 
shall provide to the other Party a list of up to three nominees for appointment as the chair of the panel.  
 7. If any of the three panellists have not been appointed within 35 days of the 
receipt of the not ification referred to in paragraph 4 , a Party may request the 
Director- General of the WTO to appoint the remaining panellists within a 
further period of 15 days.  Any list of nominees which was provided under 
paragraph 6 shall also be provided to the Direc tor-General of the WTO and 
may be used in making the required appointment.  In the event that the 
Director- General of the WTO is a national of a Party, a Deputy Director -
General  of the WTO  or the officer next in seniority who is not a national of a 
Party s hall be requested to make the required appointment. 
 8. If the Director- General of the WTO notifies the Parties to the dispute that he 
or she is unavailable, or does not appoint the remaining panellists within 15 days of the request made pursuant to paragraph 7, a Party may request the  Secretary -General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration to appoint the 
remaining panellists within a further period of 15 days .  Any list of nominees 
which was provided under paragraph 6 shall also be provided to the 
Secretary -General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and may be used in 
making the required appointments. 
 
9. The date of establishment of the panel shall be the date on which the final panellist is appointed.  
 10. If a panellist appointed under this Ar ticle resigns or becomes unable to act,  
the panellist shall notify the Parties and a successor panellist shall be appointed in accordance with this Article and shall have all the powers and duties of the original panellist.  The work of the panel, including any 
applicable time periods, shall be suspended until the successor panellist has been appointed. 
 11. If a panel is reconvened under Articles 30.15 (Compliance Review), 30.16 
(Temporary Remedies for Non- Compliance), or 30 .17 (Compliance Review 
after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies), the reconvened panel shall, if possible, have the same panellists as the original panel.  If this is not possible, 
any successor panellist shall be appointed in accordance with this Article and  
shall have all the powers and duties of the original panellist.  
  
Article 30.10  
Qualifications of Panellists  
 1. All panellists appointed pursuant to Article 30.9 ( Establishment and 
Reconvening of Panels ) shall:  
 
(a) have demonstrated expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement , or the resolution of disputes 
arising under international trade agreements;  
 (b) be chosen on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound 
judge ment;  
 (c) be independent  of, and not affiliated with or take instructions from, a 
Party;  
 (d) serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any 
organisation or government with regard to matters related to the dispute; and 
 (e) comply with the Code of Conduct.  2. An individual shall not serve as a panellist for a dispute in which that person 
has participated under Article 30 .6 (Good Offices, Conciliation and 
Mediation).  
 
3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the chair of the panel shall not:  
 
(a) be a national of a Party;  
 (b) have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of a Party; or  
 (c) be employed by a Party.  
  
Article 30.11  
Functions of a Panel
3 
 1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the  panel shall perform its functions and 
conduct its proceedings in a manner consistent with this Agreement , the 
Rules of Procedure, and the Code of Conduct. 
 Panel Assessment  
 2. A panel shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it, including an objective assessment of:   (a) the facts of the case;  
 (b) the applicability of the provisions of this Agreement; and   (c) whether:  
 
(i) a measure of the r esponding Party is inconsistent with its 
obligations under this Agreement; or 
 (ii) the responding Party has otherwise failed to carry out its 
obligations under this Agreement. 
 Terms of Reference  
 3. A panel shall have the following terms of reference unless the Parties agree otherwise within 20 days of the establishment of a panel:  
 
 “To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement  
cited by the Parties, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of a panel made pursuant to Article 30.8 (Request for 
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, paragraphs 2, 3, and 6 shall not apply to a panel reconvened under Article 
30.15 (Compliance Review), Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non- Compliance) , or Article 
30.17  (Compliance Review after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies).  Establishment of a Panel), to make such findings as provided for in 
this Agreement, togethe r with the reasons therefor, and to issue a 
written report in accordance with Article 30.11 .6 (Functions of a 
Panel) .”  
 4. The panel shall address the relevant provisions in the Agreement cited by the  
Parties.  
 5. The panel may rule on its own jurisdiction.  
 Panel Reports and Findings  6. The panel shall set out in its reports:  
 
(a) a descriptive section summarising the submissions and arguments of the Parties;  
 (b) its findings on the facts of the case and the applicability of the provisions of this Agreement;  
 (c) its findings on whether :  
 
(i) a measure of the responding Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement;  
 (ii) the responding Party h as otherwise failed to carry out its 
obligations under this Agreement; 
 
(d) any other findings jointly requested by the Parties ; and  
 
(e) its reasons for the findings in subparagraphs (b)  through (d).  
 
7. In its report, the panel may suggest ways in which the responding Party could 
implement the findings in the report. 
 8. The panel shall base its reports on the relevant provisions of this Agreement, 
the submissions and arguments of the Parties, and any information or a dvice 
put before it in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. 
 9. The findings of the panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement.  
 10. A panel shall make its findings  by consensus. If a panel is unable to reach 
consensus, it may  make its findings by majority vote.  
 11. A panel shall interpret this Agreement in accordance with the customary rules of interpretation of public international law , including as reflected  in the 
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties .  The panel shall also consider  relevant interpretations in reports of WTO panels and the Appellate Body 
adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.  
  
Article 30.12  
Reports of a Panel 
 1. The reports of the panel shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties. The panellists shall assume full responsibility for the drafting of the reports.  
Opinions expressed in the reports of the panel by individual panellists  shall 
be anonymous.  The reports shall include any separate or dissenting opinions 
on matters not unanimously agreed.   
 Interim Report  2. The panel shall issue its interim report to the Parties within 150  days of 
establishment of the panel  or, in cases of urgency , within 90 days of 
establishment of the panel .  In exceptional cases, if the panel considers that it 
cannot release its interim report within this time period , it shall promptly 
inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of when it will issue its report.  The panel shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days  and in cases of urgency  shall make every effort 
to not exceed 15 days.    
 3. A Party may submit to the panel written comments within 20 days of receipt 
of the interim report.  After considering any written comments  by the Parties 
on the interim report, the panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate. 
 Final Report  4. The panel shall issue its final report to the Parties within 30  days , and in cases 
of urgency the panel shall make every effort to issue its final report within  15 
days, of issuance of the interim report.  The panel shall include a discussion 
in its final report of any comments made by the Parties on the interim report. 
 5. The final report of the panel shall be binding on the Parties.   
Article 30.13  
Rules of Procedure and Code of Conduct  
 1. The proceedings provided for in this Chapter shall be conducted in accordance with this Chapter, the Rules of Procedure, and the Code of 
Conduct, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  On request of a Party, or on its 
own initiative, a panel may, after consulting the Parties, adopt additional rules  of procedure which do not conflict with this Chapter or the Rules of 
Procedure.  
 2. The Rules of Procedure, established in accordance with Article 29.2.1(e ) 
(Functions of the Joint Committee – Administrative and Institutional  
Provisions), shall ensure tha t: 
 
(a) there is at least one hearing before the panel at which each Party may present views orally ; 
 (b) the hearing shall be held in the capital of the responding Party, and any additional hearings shall alternate between the capitals of the Parties, unl ess the Parties agree otherwise;  
 (c) subject to subparagraph ( i), a hearing before the panel shall be open 
for the public to observe, unless the Parties agree otherwise;  
 (d) each Party has an opportunity to provide an initial written submission; 
 
(e) the panel may at any time during the proceeding address questions in writing to a Party or the Parties;   
 (f) subject to subparagraph ( i), the request for consultations, the 
request for establishment of a panel, written submissions, written versions of or al statements, any written responses to requests or 
questions from the panel, and the final report shall be released to the public;  
 (g) the panel shall  have the authority to accept and consider 
submissions from interested persons and non-governmental entities, unless the Parties agree otherwise;  
 (h) subject to consultations with the Parties, the panel may seek information or technical advice from any expert that it deems appropriate; and  
 (i) confidential information is protected. 
  
Article 30.14 
Compliance with the Final Report 
 1. If the panel finds pursuant to subparagraph 6(c)  of Article 30 .11 (Functions 
of a Panel) that a measure of the responding Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement, or that the responding Party has failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement, the responding Party shall  comply promptly with the final panel report issued pursuant to Article 30 .12 
(Reports of a Panel).  
 
2. No later than 30 days  in all cases, including cases of urgency, after the  
issuance of the final panel report, the responding Party shall notify the complaining Party:  
 
(a) of its intentions with respect to implementation, including an indication of possible steps it may take to comply with the final panel report;  
 (b) whether implementation can take place immediately; and  
 (c) if it is impracticable for implementation  to take place immediately, 
the reasonable period of time the responding Party considers it would need to comply.  
 3. If the responding Party makes a notification under subparagraph 2(c)  that it 
is impracticable to comply immediately with the final panel report, it shall have a reasonable period of time to do so.  
 4. If a reasonable period of time is required, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on the length of the reasonable period of  time.  If the Parties are unable to 
agree on the reasonable period of time within 46 days of the date the final 
panel report is issued to the Parties, a Party may request in writing the chair of the panel to determine the length of the reasonable period of time.  Such request shall be made no later than 120  days in all cases, including cases of 
urgency, after the issuance of the final panel report.  The chair shall present 
the Parties with a decision in writing, together with reasons, no later than 4 6 
days after the request.  
 5. As a guideline, the reasonable period of time, where determined by the chair 
of the panel, shall not exceed 15 months  in all cases, including cases of 
urgency, from the date of issuance of the final panel report to the Parties.  The 
length of the reasonable period of time may be extended at any time by mutual agreement of the Parties.  
 6. If the responding Party considers that it has complied with the final panel report, it shall, no later than the date of the expiry of the reasonable period of time, provide the complaining Party with a description of the steps that it has taken to comply w ith the final panel report.  Article 30.15 
Compliance Review  
 
1. If the Parties disagree on the existence or consistency with this Agreement of any steps taken to comply with the final panel report, a Party may request that the panel reconvene to decide the matter.  
 2. A request made pursuant to paragraph 1  may only be made after the earlier 
of either:  
 
(a) the expiry of the reasonable period of time  established in 
accordance with Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final Report) ; 
or  
 (b) a notifi cation by the responding Party, pursuant to paragraph 6 of 
Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final Report), that it has 
complied with the final panel report.  
 3. The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made in writing and identify 
the issues with any steps taken to comply and the legal basis for the complaint, including the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached and to be addressed by the panel, sufficient to present the problem clearly.  
 4. The panel shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it and shall set out in its compliance report: 
 
(a) a descriptive section summarising the submissions and arguments of the Parties;  
 (b) its findings on the facts of the matter ;  
 (c) its findings on the existence or consistency with this Agreement of 
any steps taken by the responding Party to comply with the final panel report ; and  
 (d) its reasons for its findings.  
 5. The panel shall reconvene within 14  days of a request made pursuant to 
paragraph 1.  The panel shall issue its final compliance report to the Parties 
no later than 120 days  or, in cases of urgency, no later than 68 days after 
receipt of the request.   
 6. The panel shall issue its interim compliance report to the Parties within 74 days of receipt of the request  under paragraph 1.  In exceptional cases, if the 
panel considers that it cannot release its interim compliance report within this time period, it sh all promptly inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for 
the delay together with an estimate of when it will issue its report.  The panel  shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days  and in cases of urgency shall 
make every effort to not exceed 15 days .  
 
7. The panel shall issue its final compliance report within 16 days in all cases, 
including cases of urgency, of issuance of the interim compliance report.  The 
panel shall accord adequate opportunity to the Parties to submit written comments on the interim compliance report. After considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim compliance report, the panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.  The panel shall include a discussion in its final compliance report of any comments made by the Parties on the interim compliance report.  
  
Article 30.16 
Temporary Remedies for Non -Compliance  
 1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations are temporary measures available in the event that the responding Party does not comply with the final panel report.  However, neither compensation nor the 
suspension of concessions or other obligations is preferred to full compliance with the final panel report.  Compensation is voluntary and, if granted, shall 
be consistent with this Agreement.  
 2. The responding Party shall, on request of the complaining Party, enter into negotiations wi th a view to agreeing on mutually acceptable compensation if:  
 
(a) the responding Party fails to provide a notification in accordance 
with paragraph 2 of Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final 
Report);  
 
(b) the responding Party has notified the complaining Party that it does not intend to comply with the final panel report;  
 (c) the responding Party fails to notify, pursuant to paragraph 6 of 
Article 30.14 (Compliance with the Final Report), any steps taken 
to comply with the final panel report; or  
 (d) the panel finds, pursuant to Article 30.15 (Compliance Review), 
that the responding Party has failed to comply with the final panel report.  
 3. If one of the conditions in paragraph 2  is met and the complain ing Party 
decides not to make a request pursuant to paragraph 2 or the Parties have been 
unable to agree on compensation within 30 days in all cases, including cases of urgency, of receipt of the request made under paragraph 2, the complaining 
Party may at any time thereafter notify the responding Party in writing that it intends to suspend the application to the responding Party of concessions or other obligations under this Agreement.   
4. A notification made under paragraph 3 shall specify:  
 
(a) the level of concessions or other obligations that the complaining Party proposes to suspend; 
 (b) the relevant sector(s) to which the concessions or other obligations relate; and  
 (c) where subparagraph 5(b) applies, the reasons on which the 
complaining Party’s decision to suspend concessions or other obligations in a different sector is based.  
 5. Subject to paragraph 4 of Article 9.23 (Dispute  Settlemen t – Financial 
Services) , in considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend 
under paragraph 3, the complaining Party shall apply the following 
principles:  
 
(a) the general principle is that the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or other obligations in the same sector(s) as that in which the panel has found an inconsistency with this Agreement; and  
 (b) if it considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions or other obligations in the same sector(s) as that in which the panel has found an inconsistency with this Agreement, the complaining Party may suspend concessions or other obligations in other sectors that are subject to dispute settlement in accordance with Article 30.4 (Scope).    
 6. The level of suspension of concessions or other obligations shall not exceed a level equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment.  
 7. The complaining Party shall have the right to implement the suspension of concessions or other obligations 30 days after the date of receipt of the complaining Party’s notification by the responding Party. 
 8. The right to suspend concessions or other obligations arising under paragraph 3 shall not be exercised if:  
 
(a) a review is being undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 9 and 10; or  
 (b) the Parties have decided, pursuant to a mutually agreed solution  
reached  in accordance with Article 30.20 (Mutually Agreed 
Solution) , that the complaining Party shall not exercise its right to 
suspend concessions or other obligations pursuant to paragraph 3.  9. If the responding Party: 
 
(a) objects to the proposed level of suspension of concessions or other obligations on the basis that it  exceeds a level equivalent to the 
level of nullification or impairment; 
 (b) considers that it has complied with the terms and conditions of any compensation agreed pursuant to paragraph 2; or 
 (c) claims that the complaining Party has failed to follow the principles set out in paragraph 5,  
 
 it may request in writing, no later than 30 days after receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 3, the panel to reconvene to make findings on the 
matter.  
 10. If a panel is requested to reconvene pursuant to paragraph 9, it shall reconvene within 15 days of receipt of the request.  The panel shall present 
its decision  to the Parties no later than  90 days after the receipt of the request.  
In exceptional cases, if the panel considers that it canno t present its decision 
within this time period  it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for 
the delay together with an estimate of when it will present its decision.  The 
panel shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days and in cases of urgency 
shall make every effort to not exceed 15 days.  
 11. Concessions or other obligations shall not be suspended until the panel has presented its decision .  Any suspension of concessions or other obligations 
shall be consistent with the panel’s decision.   
  
Article 30.17 
Compliance Review after the Adoption of Temporary Remedies  
 1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be temporary and shall only be applied until such time as the responding Party has complied with the final panel report  or the Parties have reached a 
mutually agreed solution.  
 2. If the right to suspend concessions or other obligations has been exercised pursuant to paragraph 7 of Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non-
Compliance), or mutually acceptable compensation has been agreed  pursuant 
to paragraph 2 of Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non -Compliance) , 
and the responding Party considers that it has complied with the final panel report, the responding Party shall notify the complaining Party of the steps it 
has taken to comply.   
 3. Subject to paragraph 4, the complaining Party shall terminate the suspension of concessions or other obligations within 30 days of receipt of the  notifi cation in paragraph 2.  In cases where compensation has been applied, 
and subject to paragraph 4, the responding Party may terminate the 
application of such compensation within 30 days of the complaining Party’s receipt of the notification in paragraph 2.  
 4. If the Parties disagree on the existence or consistency with this Agreement of any steps notified in accordance with paragraph 2, no later than 30 days after the date of the complaining Party’s receipt of the notification, a Party may request in writing the panel to reconvene to examine the matter.
4 
 5. Paragraphs 4 through 7 of Article 30 .15 (Compliance Review) apply if the 
panel reconvenes pursuant to paragraph 4. 
 6. If the panel decides that the steps notified in accordance with paragraph 2 achieve compliance with the final panel report, the suspension of concessions or other obligations or the application of the compensation, shall be terminated no later than 30 days after the date of the decision.   
 7. If the panel decides that the steps notified in accordance with paragraph 2 do 
not achieve compliance with the final panel report, the suspension of concessions or other obligations, or the application of the compensation, may continue.  Where relevant, the level of suspension of concessions or other obligations or of the compensation, shall be adapted in light of the decision of the panel. 
  
Article 30.18 
Suspension or Termination of Proceedings  
 1. On the request of the Parties, the panel shall suspend its work at any time for a period agreed by the Parties not to exceed 12 consecutive months.  
 2.  The panel shall resume its work at any time on the request of the P arties or at 
the end of the agreed suspension period on the request of a Party.  The request shall be made in writing and notified to the panel, as well as to the other Party, where applicable.  
 3. In the event of a suspension, the timeframes set out in this Chapter and in the Rules of Procedure shall be extended by the amount of time that the panel’s work was suspended.  
 4. If the work of the panel is suspended for more than 12 consecutive months, the panel proceedings shall lapse, unless the Parties agree otherwise.   
 5. The panel shall terminate its proceedings if the Parties request it to do so.  
                                                            
4 Where a panel is reconvened pursuant to this paragraph, it may also, on request of a Party, assess 
whether the level of any existing suspension of concessions or other obligations by the complaining 
Party is still appropriate and, if not, assess an appropriate level.  Article 30.19  
Time Periods and Cases of Urgency  
 
1. Any time period referred to in this Chapter, the Rules of Procedure , or the 
Code of Conduct may be modified for a dispute by agreement of the Parties.   
 
2. The panel may at any time propose to the Parties to modify any time period, stating the reasons for the proposal. 
 3. In cases of urgency, the applicable time periods  in this Chapter shall not 
exceed half the time prescribed therein, except:  
 
(a) for the time periods specified in  Article 30.9 (Establishment and 
Reconvening of Panels), Article 30.1 7 (Compliance Review after 
the Adoption of Temporary Remedies), and Article 30.18 (Suspension or Termination of Proceedings);   
 (b) where expressed otherwise in this Chapter ; or 
 (c) where  the Parties agree otherwise.  
 4. On the request of a Party, the panel shall decide, within 15 days of the request, whether a dispute concerns a case of urgency.  
  
Article 30.20 
Mutually Agreed Solution 
 1. The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution at any time with respect to any dispute referred to in Article 30.4  (Scope).  
 2. If a mutually agreed solution is reached during panel proceedings, the Parties shall jointly notify the agreed solution to the panel.   
  
Article 30.21 
Administration of the Dispute Settlement Procedure 
 1. The Parties may agree to jointly entrust an external body with providing support for certain administrative tasks for the dispute settlement procedure under this Chapter.  
 2. The expenses of the external body shall be borne by the Parties in equal share, 
unless the Parties agree otherwise.  Article 30.22 
Contact Point  
 
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point for this Chapter and shall notify the other Party of the contact details of that contact point  within 30 days of 
entry into force of this Agreement .  Each Party shall promptly notify the other 
Party of any change to those contact details.  
 2. Any request, notification, written submission, or other document made in 
accordance with this Chapter shal l be delivered to the other Party through its 
designated contact point.