  CHAPTER 32 
 
FINAL PROVISIONS  
 
 
Article 32.1 
Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes  
 
The Annexes, Appendices , and footnotes to this Agreement shall 
constitute an integral part of this Agreement.  
 
 
Article 32.2 
Amendments  
 
The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement.  Such 
amendments shall enter into force 30 days after the date on which the Parties 
exchange written notifications confirming that they have completed their 
respective domestic  requirements necessary for the entry into force of the 
amendments, or on such other date as the Parties may agree.  
 
 
Article 32.3 
Amendment of International Agreements  
 
If any international agreement, or a provision therein, that has been 
referred to in this Agreement or incorporated into this Agreement is amended, 
the Parties shall, at the request of either Party, consult each other on whether 
to amend this Agreement, unless this Agreement otherwise provides.  
 
 
Article 32.4 
Territorial Extension 
 
1. This Agreement, or specified provisions of it, may be extended to any such 
territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is 
responsible as may be agreed between Australia and the United Kingdom.  
Upon delivery of a written request by the  United Kingdom, the Parties shall 
hold consultations promptly to consider and agree the extension. Any 
amendment to this Agreement required to accommodate an extension shall 
be made in accordance with Article 32.2 (Amendments).  
 
2. For greater certainty, an extension in accordance with paragraph 1 may 
include extension of further provisions of this Agreement to the Bailiwicks 
of Guernsey and Jersey and the Isle of Man, as well as any extension to any 
other territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is 
responsible, including, but not limited to, Gibraltar.  Article 32.5 
Territorial Disapplication  
 
  The United Kingdom may at any time give notice in writing to 
Australia that this Agreement is, or specified provisions of it are, no longer 
to apply to a territory for whose international relations the United Kingdom 
is responsible.   If the United Kingdom gives notice in writing pursuant to this 
Article, the Parties shall hold consultations promptly to agree a mutually 
satisfactory solution.  Notwithstanding such consultations, if notice in writing 
is given that this Agreement as a whole is no longer to app ly to a territory for 
whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible, the 
notification shall take effect 12 months after the date on which the United 
Kingdom has provided written notice to Australia, or on such other date as 
the Parties ma y agree.  Any amendment to this Agreement required as a result 
of the Agreement, or specified provisions of it, no longer applying to a 
territory for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible 
shall be made in accordance with Article 3 2.2 (Amendments).  
 
 
Article 32.6  
General Review 
 
1. The Parties shall undertake a general review of this Agreement in the seventh 
year following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or at such times 
as may be agreed by the Parties.  
 
2. A review pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be undertaken with a view to updating 
and enhancing this Agreement, to ensure that the disciplines contained in this 
Agreement remain relevant to the trade and investment issues and challenges 
confronting the Parties.  
 
3. A review pursuant to paragraph 1 shall take into account : 
 
(a) developments in innovation ; 
 
 
(b) the work of all committees, working groups , dialogues and any  other 
subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement; and 
 
(c) relevant developments in international fora . 
 
 
Article 32.7 
Entry into Force  
 
This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after  the date on which 
the Parties exchange written notifications confirming that they have  completed their respective domestic requirements necessary for the entry into 
force of this Agreement, or on such other date as the Parties may agree. 
 
 
Article 32.8 
Termination  
 
1. A Party may terminate this Agreement by giving the other Party notice in 
writing. Such termination shall take effect six months after the date of the 
notification, or on such date as the Parties may agree.  
 
 
2. Within 30 days of the date of a notification issued under paragraph 1, either 
Party may request consultations regarding whether the termination of any 
provision of this Agreement should take effect on a date later than that 
provided in paragraph 1.  Such consultations shall commence within 30 days 
of the date of the request , or on such date as the Parties may agree . 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorised by their 
respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.1 
 
 
DONE at                                   on this        day of                                                           
and at                                         on this        day of                                                   ,  
in duplicate.  
 
 
 
For the United Kingdom of Great  For Australia:                                            
Britain and Northern Ireland :  
 
 
 
1 This testimonium is to be applied in accordance with the Exchange of Notes of the 16th December 
2021 between The British High Commission Canberra and the Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade of Australia.