  CHAPTER 3 
 
TRADE REMEDIES  
 
 
Section  A 
General Provisions 
 
 
Article 3.1 
Definitions  
 
 For the purposes of this Chapter:   
 “bilateral safeguard measure” means a measure referred to in paragraph 2 of 
Article 3.6 (Application of a Bilateral Safeguard M easure) ; 
 “customs duty reduction or elimination” means any customs duty reduction or elimination in accordance with  paragraph 2 of Article  2.5 ( Treatment  of Customs 
Duties  – Trade in Goods);  
 “domestic industry” means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as 
a whole of the like or directly competitive good operating within the territory of 
a Party, or those whose collective output of the like or directly competit ive good 
constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of the good;  “serious injury” means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic industry;  
 “threat of serious injury” means serious injury that  is clearly imminent , in 
accordance with the provisions of Article 3.8 (Investigation Procedure).   A 
determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury shall be based on facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture, or remote possibility; and  
  “transition period” means, in relation to a good, the entry into force of this Agreement until five years after the completion of the customs duty reduction or 
elimination in relation to  the good.  Section  B 
Anti -dumping and Countervailing Measures  
 
 
Article 3.2 
General Provision 
 
Except as provided in this Section, e ach Party affirms its rights and 
obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, the AD Agreement , and the SCM 
Agreement.   
  
Article 3.3 
Investigations  
 1.  After receipt by a Party’s investigating authority of a properly documented application for an anti -dumping investigation or a countervailing duty 
investigation with respect to imports from the other Party and  before initiating 
an investigation, the importing  Party shall provide written notification to
 the 
other Party of its receipt of the application .  
 2.  Without prejudice to its other rights and obligations under the SCM Agreement, prior to initiating a countervailing duty investigation against imports from the 
other Party, the importing Party shall afford to the other Party a reasonable opportunity to consult with the aim of clarifying the situation on matters raised in the application and arriving at a mutually agreed solution.  Any such 
consultations shall not unnecessarily delay or prevent a Party from proceeding expeditiously to initiate and conduct an investigation. 
  3. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under Articles 6.2 and 6.3 of the AD Agreement and Article 12.2 of the SCM Agreement, including with res pect 
to the rights of interested parties to present information orally and to defend their interests in the conduct of an anti -dumping investigation or a countervailing duty 
investigation. 
 
 4.  Each Party shall ensure, before a final determination is made, full and meaningful disclosure of all essential facts under consideration which form the basis for the decision whether to apply definiti ve measures in an anti -dumping 
investigation or a countervailing duty investigation.  This is without prejudice to 
Article 6.5 of the AD Agreement  and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement . 
Disclosures shall be made in writing, and allow interested parties sufficient time to defend their interests .  Article 3.4 
Lesser- duty R ule 
 
Each Party ’s investigating authority may consider whether the amount of 
the anti -dumping or countervailing duty to be imposed shall be the full margin 
of dumping or  total amount of the  subsidy or a lesser amount, in accordance with 
the Party ’s laws and regulations.  
 
 
Section  C 
Global Safeguard Measures 
  
Article 3.5 
General Provisions and T ransparency  
 1. E xcept as provided in this Section, nothing in this Agreement affects either 
Party’s rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards. 
 
2. A Party that initiates a safeguard investigatory process shall provide to the other  
Party  an electronic copy of  any notification given to the WTO Committee on 
Safeguards under Article 12.1 of the Agree ment on Safeguards.  
 3.  To the extent permitted by the Agreement  on Safeguards, when imposing 
safeguard measures, each Party shall endeavour to impose them in a way that 
least affects bilateral trade.   
  
Section D  
Bilateral Safeguard Measures 
  
Article 3.6 
Application  of a Bilateral Safeguard M easure  
 1.  
 If, as a result of customs duty reduction or  elimination,  an originating good of 
the other Party is being imported into the territory  of a Party  in such increased 
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such 
conditions as to cause serious injury or threat of serious injury, the importing 
Party may apply a safeguard provided for in paragraph 2 to the extent necessary 
to prevent or remedy the serious injury and to facilitate the adjustment of the 
domestic industry.  2.   In accordance with paragraph 1, the importing Party may apply one of the 
following bilateral safeguard measures: 
 
(a)  a suspension of the f urther customs duty reduction or elimination in 
relation to  the good; or 
 
(b)  an increase in the rate of  customs duty on the good to a level that does 
not exceed the lesser of:  
 
(i)  the most -favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty in effect at 
the time the measure is applied; or 
 (ii)  the most -favoured- nation applied rate of  customs duty on the 
good in effect on the day immediately preceding the date of entry 
into force of this Agreement. 
  
Article 3.7 
Duration and Scope  
 1.  A Party  shall  apply a bilateral safeguard measure only for such period of time  as 
may be  necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate  the 
adjustment of the domestic industry.
 
 
2. The period referred to in paragraph 1 shall not exceed  two years , except that the 
period may be extended by no more than two years  if the competent authority of  
the Party that applies the measure determines,  in conformity with the procedures 
set out in Article  3.8 (Investigation Procedure), that the  bilateral safeguard 
measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustm ent. 
 
3. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a bilateral safeguard measure is more than one year,  the Party that applies the 
measure shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals  during its period of 
application.  
 
 
4.  Neither Party shall  apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a good that has already 
been subject to a bilateral safeguard measure for a period of time equal to the 
duration of the previous safeguard or one year  after its termination, whichever is 
longer.   
  
5.  When a Party  terminates  a bilateral safeguard measure on a good, the rate of  
customs duty for that good shall be the  rate that would have been in effect in 
accordance with the Party’s S chedule to Annex 2A (Tariff Commitments) but 
for the bilateral safeguard measure.    
 6.     Neither Party shall  apply  or maintain a bilateral safeguard measure after the          
transition period.  
  
 
Article 3.8 
Investigation Procedure 
 
1. A Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure only following an investigation by the Party’s competent authorit y in accordance with the same procedures as 
those provided for in Articles 3 and 4.2 of the Safeguards Agreement; to this end, Articles 3 and 4.2 of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis . 
 2.
 An investigation shall not exceed one year, but a Party may, in exceptional circumstances, and as mutually agreed with the other Party , extend the 
investigation for no more than the time necessary to complete the investigation.  The other Party should not unreasonably withhold its agreement to the extension.   
  
Article 3.9 
Notification and Consultation 
 1.   A Party shall provide written notice to the other Party immediately after:  
 
(a)  initiating an investigation referred to in Article 3.8 (Investigation 
Procedure); 
 
(b)  making a finding of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by increased imports  of an originating good of  the other Party as a result of 
a customs duty reduction or elimination in relation to the good; 
 
(c)  taking a decision to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure; or  
 
(d)  taking a decision to modify a bilateral safeguard measure for progressive 
libera lisation.  
 2. A Party shall provide promptly to the other Party a copy of the public version of the report of its competent authority following the conclusion of its investigation as set out under Article 3.8  (Investigation Procedure).  
 
3.   The Party providing a written notice referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide the 
other Party with all pertinent information, which shall include:  (a)  in the written notice referred to in subparagraph 1(a), the reason for the 
initiation of the investigation, a precise description of the good subject to the investigation (including its subheading in the Harmonized System), 
the importation period subject to the investigation, and the date of initiation of the investigation; and  
 
(b)  in the written notice referred to in subparagraphs  1(b) through (d), the 
evidence of the serious injury or the threat of serious injury caused by the increased imports of the good as a result of the customs duty reduction or elimination, a precise description of the good subject to the proposed 
bilateral safeguard measure (including its subheading in  the Harmonized 
System ), a precise description of the bilateral safeguard measure, and, as 
applicable, the proposed date of the introduction,  extension, or 
modification of the bilateral safeguard measure, its expected duration, 
and the timetable for the progressive liberalisation of the measure.   In the 
case of an extension of a bilateral safeguard measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is adjusting shall also be provided. 
 4.   A Party proposing to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure shall provide  
adequate opportunity for prior consultations with the other Party with a view to reviewing the information provided under subparagraph 3(b), exchanging views 
on the bilateral safeguard measure, and reaching an agreement on compensation 
set out in Article 3.11 (Compensation).   
  
Article 3.10
 
Provisional Application  of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure   
 
1.  In critical circumstances, a Party may  apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a 
provisional basis if:  
 
(a)  delay would cause damage to a domestic industry that would be difficult to repair; and  
 
 
(b)  the Party’s competent authority makes a preliminary determination  that 
there is  clear evidenc e that imports of an originating  good of the other 
Party have increased as the result of the customs duty reduction or elimination in relation to the good, and that  those increased  imports have 
caused or are threatening to cause serious injury . 
 
 
2. Before  applying a bilateral safeguard measure on a provisional basis the applying 
Party  shall provide  written notice  to the other Party.   Consultation between the 
Parties on the application  of the measure on a provisional basis shall be initiated 
immediately after the measure is applied.  3. A bilateral safeguard measure applied on a provisional basis shall not be 
maintained for more than 200 days .  The duration of  a bilateral safeguard applied 
on a provisional basis shall be counted as part of the period described in 
paragraph 2 of Article 3.7 (Duration and Scope).  
 
4. The increase in customs duty paid as a result of the  application  of the bilateral 
safeguard measur e on a provisional basis shall be promptly refunded if the 
Party’s competent authority, in the investigation referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.8 (Investigation Procedure), does not determine that the increase in 
imports of the good subject to the mea sure has caused  or threatened to cause  
serious injury.
 
  
Article 3.11 
Compensation 
 1. A Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall , in consultation with the 
other Party, provide mutually agreed trade liberalising compensation in the form 
of concessions having substantially equivalent trade  effects or  equivalent to the 
value of the additional duties expected to result from the bilateral safeguard 
measure.   The Party shall provide an opportunity for those consultations no later 
than 30 days after the application  or the extension of the bilateral safeguard 
measure. 
 2. If the consultations under paragraph 1 do not result in the Parties agreeing  on 
trade liberalising compensation within 30 days, the Party against whose good the 
bilateral safeguard measure is applied may suspend the application of 
substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party  applying  the 
bilateral safeguard measu re. 
 
3. The Party against whose good the bilateral safeguard measure is applied shall 
notify the other Party in writing at least 30 days before it suspends concessions in accordance with paragraph 2.  
 4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 1 and the right to suspend concessions under paragraph 2 terminates on the termination of the 
bilateral safeguard measure. 
  
Article 3.12 
Non-cumulation  
 1.  Neither Party shall apply or maintain  two or more of the following measures, 
with respect to  the same good at the same time:  (a)  a bilateral safeguard measure;  
 
(b)  a safeguard measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the 
Agreement on Safeguards;  
 
(c)  a safeguard measure under the Agreement on Agriculture , in Annex 1A 
to the WTO Agreement ;  
 
(d)  a product -specific safeguard under the Party’s Schedule to Annex 2A 
(Tariff Commitments). 
  
Article 3.13 
Non-application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under Section B or C.