CHAPTER 5  
 
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION 
 
 
Article 5.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
   
“customs laws” means any laws and regulations applicable in the territory of 
each Party governing the import, export , and transit of goods, as well as other 
customs procedures, and including measures of prohibition, restriction, and control, administered, applied or enforced by the customs authorities of the Parties; a nd  
 “customs procedures” means the measures applied by the customs authority of each Party . 
  
Article 5.2 
Scope  
 1. This Chapter applies to customs procedures applied to goods traded between 
the Parties.  
 2. This Chapter shall be implemented by each Party in accordance with its laws and regulations.  
  
Article 5.3 
Customs Procedures and Facilitation of Trade  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures are applied in a manner that is predictable, consistent , transparent , and non- discriminatory . 
 2. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the Trade Facilitation Agreement.   
 3. Customs procedures of each Party shall conform, where possible, and to the extent permitted by its respective laws, regulations , and policies, to 
international standards and recommended practices established by the World Customs Organization ("WCO ") and under other relevant international 
agreements to which the Parties are party.  
 4. Each Party shall periodically review its customs procedures with a view to exploring options for their simplification and the enhancement of mutually beneficial arrangements to facilitate trade between the Parties.  
  
5. The Parties shall seek to reinforce their cooperation to promote trade facilitation while ensuring effective customs control.  
  
Article 5.4 
Data, Documentation and Automation 
  1. With a view to simplifying and minimising the complexity of import, export , 
and transit formalities and documentation requirements, each Party shall ensure as appropriate, that such formalities, data, and documentation 
requirements:   
  
(a) are adopted or applied with a view to a rapid release of goods, to  facilitate trade between  the Parties; and   
 
(b) are adopted or applied in a manner that aims to reduce the time and cost of compliance for traders and operators.    
  2. Each Party shall :  
 
(a) make  electronic systems accessible to customs users;   
 
(b) allow  a customs declaration to be submitted in electronic  format;   
 
(c) employ electronic or automated systems for risk analysis and targeting; and 
 
(d) endeavour to implement common standards and elements for import and export data by giving consideration to the WCO Data Model;  
   3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the development of interoperable electronic systems,  to facilitate trade between the Parties.   
  
Article 5.5 
Transparency and Publication 
 1. Further to Article 28.2 (Publication  – Transparency and Anti-Corruption) , 
each Party shall promptly publish, including online: 
 
(a) importation, exportation , and transit procedures (including port, 
airport, and other entry point procedures) and required forms and documents; 
 
(b) applied rates of duties and taxes of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation;  
 (c) fees and charges imposed by or for governmental agencies on or in 
connection with importation, exportation or transit; 
 
(d) rules for the classi fication or valuation of products for customs 
purposes; 
 
(e) laws, regulations , and administrative rulings of general application 
relating to rules of origin; 
 
(f) import, export or transit restrictions or prohibitions;  
 
(g) penalty provisions against breaches of import, export or transit formalities;  
 
(h) procedures for appeal or review; 
 
(i) agreements or parts thereof with any country or countries relating to importation, exportation or transit;  
 
(j) procedures relating to the administration of tariff quotas; 
 
(k) hours of operation services provided by customs offices at ports and 
border crossing points; and 
 
(l) points of contact for information enquiries. 
 2. Each Party shall establish or maintain one or more enquiry points to address enquiries of interested parties or persons concerning customs and other trade facilitation issues and shall make information concerning the procedures for making those enquiries publicly available online.  The enquiry points shall 
answer enquiries and provide the forms and documents within a reasonable time period set by each Party, which may vary depending on the nature or complexity of the request. 
  
Article 5.6 
Simplified Customs Procedures  
    Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures allowing traders or 
operators fulfilling criteria specified in its laws and regulations to benefit from further simplification of customs procedures.  Those measures may b e 
offered through a Party’s Authorised Economic Operator program, or otherwise made available to traders or operators in accordance with its laws 
and regulations and may include:  
 
(a) customs declarations containing a reduced set of data or supporting documents, including for the movement of  low- value  consignments;  
 (b) deferred payment of customs duties and taxes until after the release 
of those imported goods; and  
 
(c) other matters as the Party  may decide.  
  
Article 5.7 
Expedited Shipments  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for 
expedited shipments ,
1 while maintaining appropriate customs control and 
selection.   These procedures shall:   
 
(a) provide for the submission and processing of information in advance of the ar rival
2 of a shipment to expedite its release;  
 
(b) to the extent possible, allow for a single submission of information covering all goods contained in a shipment through, if possible, electronic means;  
 
(c) to the extent possible, provide for the release of expedited shipments with a minimum of documentation or a reduced set of data;  
 
(d) provide, in normal circumstances, for an expedited shipment to be released within six hours of arrival, provided:  
 
(i) all information and documentation necessary to release the 
goods have been submitted on or prior to arrival;  
 
(ii) the goods are not  subject to physical examination or 
inspection; and  
 
(iii) the goods are otherwise admissible under the importing Party’s  laws and regulations;  
 
(e) apply to shipments of any weight or value recognising that a Party may require additional entry procedures as a condition for release, including declarations and supporting documentation and payment of customs duties, and may limit such treatment based on the type of good; and   
 
                                                            
1 Expedited shipments may include goods imported through air cargo, or goods imported by traders 
fulfilling other criteria specified in the importing Party’s laws and regulations.  
2 For the purposes of this Article and in relation to shipments into the UK,  “arrival” for the UK means 
arrival at the point where the goods are presented to customs.  
 (f) provide that under normal circumstances  no customs duties will be 
assessed on expedited shipments valued at or below a fixed amount 
set under a Party’s law.     
 2. If a Party does not provide the t reatment in subparagraphs 1(a) through 1(f) 
to all shipments, that Party shall provide a separate
3 and expedited customs 
procedure that provides that treatment for expedited shipments. 
  
Article 5.8 
Release of Goods  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods  in order to  facilitate trade between the Parties in a 
manner that aims to reduce the cost for traders.  This paragraph shall not 
require a Party to release a good if its requirements for rele ase have not been 
met.    
 2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:    
(a) provide, in normal circumstances, for goods  to be released within 48 
hours of arrival,
4 provided: 
 
(i) all information  and documentation necessary to release the 
goods have been submitted on or prior to arrival;  
 
(ii) the goods are not subject to physical examination or inspection; and 
 
(iii) the goods are otherwise admissible under the importing Party’s laws and regulati ons; 
 
(b) i f applicable and to the extent possible, provide for the electronic 
submission and processing of customs information relating to import in advance of the arrival of the goods to expedite the release of goods from customs control upon arrival;  
 
(c) allow goods to be released without temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities;   
 
(d) allow for  the release of goods prior to the final determination of 
customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges not determined prior to or promptly upon arrival, provided that the good is otherwise eligible for release and any security required by the importing Party has been provided.  Before releasing the goods, a Party may require that an 
                                                            
3 For greater certainty, “separate” does not mean a specific facility or lane.  
4 For the purposes of this Article and in relation to shipments into the UK “arrival” for the UK means 
arrival at the point where the goods are presented to customs.  
 importer provides sufficient guarantee in the form of a surety, a 
deposit, or some other appropriate  instrument; and  
  
(e) to the extent possible and if applicable, provide for, in accordance with its laws and regulations, clearance of certain goods with a minimum of documentation.  
   3. If a Party allows for the release of go ods conditioned on a security, it shall 
adopt or maintain procedures that:   
   
(a) ensure that the amount of the security is no greater than that required 
to ensure that obligations arising from the importation of the goods will be  fulfilled;     
   
(b) ensure that the security shall be discharged as soon as possible after its customs authority is satisfied that the obligations arising from the 
importation of the goods have been fulfilled; and    
 
(c) allow importers to provide security using a form other than cash, 
including, in appropriate cases where an importer frequently enters goods, instruments covering multiple entries.   
   
Article 5.9 
Risk Management  
  1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management system  for customs 
control that enables its customs authority to focus its inspection activities on 
high-risk consignments and expedite the release of low-risk consignments.  
 2. Each Party shall design and apply risk management in a manner as to avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or disguised restrictions to international trade.   
 3. Each Party shall base risk management on assessment of risk through appropriate selectivity criteria.   
 4. Each Party may also select, on a random basis, consignments for inspection activities referred  to in paragraph 1 as part of its risk management.  
 5. In order to  facilitate trade, each Party shall periodically review and update, 
as appropriate, the risk management system specified in paragraph 1.  
   
Article 5.10 
Advance Rulings  
 1. Each Party shall issue, prior to the importation of a good of the other Party 
into its territory, a written advance ruling at the written request of an importer in its territory, or an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party
5, each an "app licant" , with regard to:     
   
(a) tariff classification;     
  (b) whether a good is originating in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures); and    
  (c) other matters as the Part y may decide.   
   2. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling as expeditiously as possible and in no case later than 90 days after it receives a request, provided that the applicant has submitted all the information that the receiving Party requires 
to make the advance ruling.  This includes a sample of the good for which the 
applicant  is seeking an advance ruling if requested by the receiving Party.  In 
issuing an advance ruling, the Party shall take into account the facts and circumstances that the applicant  has provided.  For greater certainty, a Party 
may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and circumstances forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of administrative or judicial review or where the application is not based on factual information, or  does 
not relate to an intention to import or export .  A Party that declines to issue 
an advance ruling shall promptly notify the applicant  in writing, setting out 
the relevant facts and circumstances and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the advance ruling.   
 3. Each Party shall provide that its advance rulings shall take effect on the date that they are issued or on another date specified in the ruling, and remain in effect for at least three years, provided that the law,  facts and circumstances 
on which the ruling is based remain unchanged.   
   4. After issuing an advance ruling, the Party may modify or revoke the advance ruling if there is a change in the law, facts or circumstances on which the ruling was based, if the ruling was based on inaccurate or false information, 
if the ruling was in error, if conflicting advance rulings have been issued for goods of the same class or kind, if the advance ruling has been reviewed 
internally, or if the importing customs authority  changes its interpretation of 
the law.    
   5. Where  a Party revokes or modifies an advance ruling, it shall provide written 
notice to the applicant setting out the relevant facts and the basis for its decision.  
  6. Neither Party shall apply a revocati on or modification retroactively to the 
detriment of the applicant unless the ruling was based on incomplete, 
                                                            
5 For greater certainty, an importer, exporter or producer may submit a request for an advance ruling 
through a duly authorised representative.  
 incorrect, inaccurate, false , or misleading information provided by the 
applicant .   
 
7. Subject to any confidentiality requirements in its laws and regulations, a Party may publish its advance rulings including online.   
  8. Each Party shall publish online, at least:   
   
(a) the requirements for the application for an advance ruling, including the information to be provided and the  format;    
 
(b) the time period  by which it will issue an advance ruling; and   
 
(c) the length of time for which the advance ruling is valid.  
   9. An advance ruling issued by a Party shall be binding on that Party in respect of the applicant that sought it and on the applicant.   
   10. Each Party shall provide, upon written request of an applicant, a review of the advance ruling or of the decision to revoke or modify it.    
  
Article 5.11 
Customs valuation  
  
 For the purpose of  determining the customs value of goods traded 
between the Parties, the provisions of Part I of the Customs Valuation 
Agreement  shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
  
Article 5.12 
Review and Appeal  
 1. Each Party shall ensure that any person to whom it issues a decision on a 
customs matter has access to:  
 
(a)  an administrative appeal to or review by an administrative authority higher than or independent of the official  or office that issued the 
decision; and 
 
(b)  a judicial  appeal or review of the decision.  
 
2. Each Party shall ensure that, in a case where the decision on appeal or review under subparagraph 1 (a) is not given within the period of time provided for in its laws and regulations or without undue delay, the pe rson has the right to 
further administrative or judicial appeal or review or any other recourse to the judicial authority in accordance with that Party’s laws and regulations.  
  
3. Each Party shall provide a person to whom it issues an administrative decision on the basis of a review or appeal referred to in paragraph 1 with the reasons for the administrative decision, so as to enable such a person to have recourse to appeal procedures where necessary.  
  
Article 5.13 
Penalties  
 1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that allow for the imposition of a penalty by a Party’s customs authority for a breach of its customs laws . 
 2. E ach Party shall ensure that any penalties imposed for breaches of customs 
laws are proportionate and non-discriminatory.  Any penalty imposed shall 
depend on the facts and circumstances of the case and shall be commensurate with the degree and severity of the breach.  
 3. Each Party shall ensure that a penalty imposed by its customs authority for a 
breach of its customs laws  is imposed only on the person legally responsible 
for the breach. 
 4. Each Party is encouraged to require its customs authority, when imposing a penalty for a breach of its customs laws, to consider as a potential mitigating 
factor the voluntary disclosure of the breach prior to its discovery by the customs authority. 
 5. Each Party shall ensure that if a penalty is imposed for a breach of customs laws, an explanation in writing is provided to the person upon whom the 
penalty is imposed, specifying the nature of the breach and the applicable laws under which the amount or range of penalty for the breach has been 
prescribed.  
 6. Each Party shall provide in its laws, regulations  or procedures, or otherwise 
give effect to, a fixed and finite period within which its customs authority may initiate proceedings to impose a penalty relating to a breach of its  
customs laws. 
  
Article 5.14 
Customs Cooperation 
  1. The Parties shall, within the competence and available resources of their respective customs authorit ies, enhance cooperation, including the exchange 
of information on the matters referred to in this Chapter , with a view to 
further developing trade facilit ation , while ensuring compliance with their 
respective customs laws,  regulations, and procedural requirements, and 
improving supply chain security, in the following areas:  
  
(a) cooperation on harmonisation of data requirements for customs 
purposes, in line with applicable international standards such as the WCO  standards;  
  (b) cooperation on further development of the customs -related aspects of 
securing and facilitating the international trade supply chain in accordance with the SAFE Framework  of Standards to Secure and 
Facilitate Global Trade , adopted by the WCO Council in June 2005;  
 
(c) cooperation on improvement of their risk management techniques, including sharing best practices and, if appropriate, risk information and control results; and 
 (d) cooperation in international organisations on matters of common interest, including tariff classification, customs valuation and origin.  
  
Article 5.15 
Single Window  
    Each Party shall endeavour to develop or maintain single window 
systems to facilitate a single, electronic submission of all information required by customs and other legislation for the exportation, importation  and transit of goods.  
  
Article 5.16 
Transit and Transhipment  
  Each Party shall:    
 
(a) ensure the facilitation and effective control of transhipment operations and transit movements through their  
respective territories;  
 
(b) ensure that its authorities and agencies responsible for border controls and procedures dealing with the transit and transhipment of goods 
cooperate and coordinate their activities in order to facilitate trade ; 
and   
 
(c) allow goods intended for import to be moved under customs control within its territory from a customs office of entry to another customs office in its  territory from where the goods would be released or 
cleared.  
 Article 5.17 
Post-clearance Audit  
  
1. With a view to expediting the release of goods, each Party shall:    
(a) adopt or maintain post -clearance audit processes to ensure 
compliance with customs and other related laws and  regulations;  
 
(b) conduct post -clearance audits in a risk -based manner, which may 
include appropriate selectivity  criteria;  
 
(c) conduct post -clearance audits in a transparent manner.  Where an 
audit is conducted and conclusive results have been achieved the Party shall, without delay, notify the person whose record is audited of the results, the reasons for the results and the audited person's rights and obligations; and  
  
(d) wherever practicable, use the result of po st-clearance audit in 
applying risk management.   
  
Article 5.18 
Customs Brokers  
  The Parties shall :   
  
(a) not require the mandatory use of customs brokers;  
 
(b) publish measures on the use of customs brokers; and   
 
(c) apply transparent  and objective rules if and when licensing customs 
brokers. 
  
Article 5.19 
Temporary Admission of Goods 
 1. Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations, goods to be brought into its territory, conditionally relieved, totally or partially, from 
payment of import duties and taxes, if such goods are brought into its customs territory for a specific purpose , have not undergone any change except 
normal depreciation and wastage due to the use made of them , and are 
intended for re -exportation within a specific period.  
 2. Each Party shall continue to facilitate procedures for the temporary admission of goods traded between the Parties in accordance with its laws and 
regulations, and international obligations, with regard to :  
 (a) goods intended for display or demonstration at exhibitions, fairs, 
meetings, demonstrations or similar events, and goods intended for 
use in connection with the display of foreign products at those events;  
 
(b) professional equipment; 
 
(c) commercial samples, advertising , films and recordings; 
 
(d) containers, packing materials and pallets that are in use or to be used in the shipment of goods in international traffic; 
 
(e) goods imported for sports purposes ; and 
 
(f) any other goods as the Party may decide.  
  
Article 5.20 
Perishable Goods   
  1. For the purposes of this Article, perishable goods are goods that rapidly decay due to their natural characteristics, in particular in the absence of appropriate storage conditions.   
 2. With a view to preventing avoidable loss or deterioration of perishable goods, and provided that all regulatory requirements have been met, each Party shall : 
 
(a) provide in normal circumstances, for perishable goods to be released within 6 hours of arrival
6 provided:  
 
(i) all information and documentation necessary to release the goods have been submitted on or prior to arrival; 
 
(ii) the goods are not subject to physical examination or  
inspection;  
 
(iii) the goods are otherwise admissible under the importing Party’s  laws and regulations; and 
 
(b) in exceptional circumstances where it would be appropriate to do so, provide for the release of perishable goods  outside the business hours 
of customs and other relevant authorities.   
 3. Each Party shall give appropriate priority to perishable goods when scheduling any physical examinations or inspections that may be required.   
   
                                                            
6 For the purposes of this Article and in relation to shipments into the UK, “arrival” means at the point 
where the goods are presented to customs.  
 4. Each Party shall either arrange or allow an importer to arrange for the proper 
storage of perishable goods pending their release.  Each Part y may require 
that any storage facilities arranged by the importer have been approved or designated by its relevant authorities.   The movement of the goods to those 
storage facilities, including authorisations for the operator moving the goods, 
may be subject to the approval, where required, of the relevant authorities.  
Each Party shall, where practicable and consistent with domestic legislation, upon the request of the importer, provide for any procedures nece ssary for 
release to take place at those storage facilities.    
   
Article 5.21 
Confidentiality  
 1. Further to Article 31.6 (Confidential ity of Information – General Provisions 
and Exceptions), each Party shall maintain the confidentiality of the information collected  pursuant to this Chapter or Chapter 4 ( Rules of Origin  
and Origin Procedures ) and shall protect that information from disclosure that 
could prejudice the competitive position of the person to whom the confidential information relates.  
 2. Confidential information collected pursuant to this Chapter  or Chapter 4 
(Rules of Origin  and Origin Procedures ) shall only be used or disclosed for 
the purpose of administration and enforcement of customs matters, including determination of origin, or as otherwise provided under the Party’s law s and 
regulations, except with the permission of the Pa rty who provided the 
confidential information. Where permission has been granted by a Party, that 
use shall then be subject to any restrictions laid down by that Party.  
 3. If the Party receiving or obtaining the information is authorised or required by its laws and regulations  to disclose the information, that Party shall,  where 
possible, notify the Party who provided that information, wherever possible 
in advance of that disclosure. 
 4. Paragraph 2 shall not preclude the use of information collected as part of its customs processes as evidence in proceedings or charges subsequently instituted before the courts or tribunals for failure to comply with customs law.  Where the information is received from the other Party, the Party shall , 
where possible,  notify the Party who provided the information in advance of 
such use.  
  
Article 5.22 
Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation  
   The Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs and Trade 
Facilitation established pursuant to Article 4.29 (Working Group on Rules of  
 Origin and Customs and Trade Facilitation – Rules of Origin) shall consider 
any matters arising under this Chapter.