  
 CHAPTER 8 
 
CROSS -BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES  
 
 
Article 8.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“airport operation services ” means the operation or management, on a fee or 
contract basis, of airport infrastructure, including terminals, runways, taxiways and aprons, parking facilities, and intra -airport transportation 
systems.  Airport operation services do not include air navig ation services;  
 “computer reservation system services ” means services provided by 
computerised systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and fare rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;  
 “cross -border trade in services ” or “ cross-border supply of services ” means 
the supply of a service: 
 
(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other 
Party;  
 (b) in the territory of a Party to a person of the other Party; or  
 (c)  by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party ; 
 
but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a covered investment;  
 “enterprise ” means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.4 (General 
Definitions  – Initial Provisions and General Definitions ), and  a branch of an 
enterprise;  
 
“enterprise of a Party ” means:  
 
(a)  an enterprise as defined in Article 1. 4 (General Definitions – 
Initial Provisions and General Definitions), constituted or 
organised under the law of that Party, or a branch located in the territory of that  Party, and carrying out substantial 
business activities in the territory of that Party; or  (b)  an enterprise of a non -Party owned or controlled by a person 
of a Party ,1 if any of its vessels are registered in accordance 
with the l aw of that Party and flying the flag of that Party, 
when supplying services within the scope of Annex 8B 
(International Maritime Transport S ervices) using those 
vessels;  
 “ground handling services ” means the supply of a service on a fee or contract 
basis for:  airline representation, administration and supervision, ground 
administration and supervision, including load control and communications; passenger handling; baggage handling; ramp services; air cargo and mail 
handling; aviation fuel and oil handling; flight operations, crew 
administration and flight planning; aircraft servicing and cleaning; surface transport; and catering services. Ground handling services do not include: self-handling; security services; fixed intra -airport transport systems; line 
maint enance; aircraft repair and maintenance; or the operation or 
management of centralised airport infrastructure such as de -icing facilities, 
fuel distribution systems, or baggage handling systems;  “measures of a Party ” means measures adopted or maintained by 
 
(a) central, regional, or local governments or authorities; or  
 (b) non- governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated 
by central, regional, or local governments or authorities; 
 “selling and marketing of air transport services ” means opportunities for the 
air carrier concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of marketing such as market research, advertising and distribution.  These activities do not include the pricing of air transport 
services or the applicable conditions;  
“service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” means, for each 
Party, any service that  is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in 
competition with one or more service suppliers; 
 “service supplier  of a Party ” means a person of a Party that seeks to supply 
or supplies a service; and  
 “specialty air services ” means a specialised commercial operation using an 
aircraft whose primary purpose is not the transportation of goods or passengers, such as aerial fire-fighting, aerial advertising, flight training, 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty , “person of a Party ” in this subparagraph means: a national, or an “enterprise 
of a Party ” as defined in subparagraph ( a) of this definition .  sightseeing, spraying, surveying, mapping, photography, parachute  jumping, 
glider towing, and helicopter -lift for logging and construction, and other 
airborne agricultural, industrial and inspection services. 
 
 
Article 8.2 
Scope  
 1. This Chapter applies to measures of a Party affecting cross -border trade in 
services by service suppliers of the other Party.  Those measures include 
measures affecting:  
 
(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale or delivery of a service; 
 (b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;  
 
(c) the access to and use of distribution, transport or telecommunications 
networks and services in connection with the supply of a service; 
 
(d)  the presence in the Party’s territory of a service supplier of the other Party; and  
 
(e)  the provision of a bond or other form of financial security as a 
condition for the supply of a service. 
 2.  In addition to paragraph 1:   
(a)  Article  8.9 (Recognition) and 8.11 (Transparency) also apply to 
measures of a Party affecting  the supply of a service in its territory by 
a covered investment . 
 (b)  Article 8.8 (Domestic Regulation) also applies to measures of a Party 
that impose licensing requirements and procedures, qualification requirements and procedures, and technical standards ,
2 affect ing the 
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of a covered investment in the form of an enterprise, as these terms are defined in Article 13.1 
(Definitions  – Investment). 
 
                                                            
2 As far as measures relating to technical standards are concerned, Article 8.8 (Domestic Regulation) 
only applies to those measures a ffecting cross -border trade in services or the supply of services in its 
territory by a covered inves tment in the form of an enterprise.  (c)  Annex 8A (Express Delivery Services) also applies to measures of a 
Party affecting the supply of express delivery services, including by 
a covered investment.  
 (d)  Annex 8B (International Maritime Transport Services) also applies to 
measures of a Party affecting the supply  of international maritime 
transport services;  
 3.  This Chapter does not apply to:  
(a)  financial services as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions – Financial 
Services ); 
 
(b)  government procurement; 
 (c)  services supplied in the exercise of governmental  authority;
3 
 (d)  subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government -
supported loans, guarantees and insurance ; or 
  (e)  audio- visual services. 
 
4.  This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a 
national of the other  Party who seeks access to its employment market or who 
is employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not confer any right on that national with respect to that access or employment.   For greater 
certainty, this Chapter does not apply to measures regarding citizenship, 
nationality or residence on a permanent basis.  
 
5.  This Chapter shall not apply to air services, including domestic and international air transportation services, whether scheduled or non -
scheduled, or to related services in su pport of air services, other than the 
following: 
 
(a)  repair and maintenance services on an aircraft  or a part thereof  during 
which the aircraft or the part is withdrawn from service , and aircraft 
line maintenance;  
 
(b)  selling and marketing of air transport services;  
                                                            
3 Article  8.8 (Domestic Regulation) does not apply  to activities carried out in the exercise of 
governmental authority.  “activities carried out in the exercise of governmental authority” means  
activities carried out neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more economic 
operators.   
(c)  computer reservation system services;  
 
(d)  specialty air services;4  
 
(e) airport operation services; and 
 
(f)  ground handling services. 
 
6.  In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and a bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral air services agreement to which both Parties are 
party, the air services agreement shall prevail in determining the rights and obligations of the Parties. 
 7.  If the Parties have the same obligations under this Agreement and a bilateral, plurilateral, or multilateral air services agreement, they may invoke the 
dispute settlement procedures of this Agreement only after any dispute settlement procedures in the other agreement have been exhausted.  
 8.  If the Annex on Air Transport Services of  GATS is amended, the Parties may 
jointly review any new definitions. 
 
 
Article 8.3 
National Treatment
5 
 
1.  Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party  
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own services and service suppliers.  
 2.  For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less 
favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like 
circumstances, by that regional level of government to service suppliers of the Party of which it forms a part. 
  
 
 
                                                            
4 Subject to compliance with each Party’s laws and regulations governing the admission of aircraft 
to, departure from and operation within, their territory.  
5 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 8 .3 
(National Treatment) or Article 8 .4 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the 
circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between services or service 
suppliers on the basis of legitimate public welfare obj ectives.   
Article 8.4 
Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment 
 
Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other 
Party  treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, 
to services and service suppliers of a non- Party.6 
 
 
Article 8.5 
Market Access  
 
Neither Party shall adopt or maintain, either on the basis of its entire 
territory or on the basis of the territory of a central, regional or local level of 
government, a measure that:  
 
(a)  imposes a limitation  on: 
 
(i)  the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;  
 
(ii)  the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; 
 
(iii)  the total number of service operations or the total quantity of 
service output expressed in terms of designated numerical 
units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic 
needs test;
7 or 
 
(iv)  the total number of natural persons that may be employed in 
a particular service sector or that a service supplier may 
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the 
supply of a specific service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or  
 
(b)  restricts or require s specific types of legal entity or joint venture 
through which a service supplier may supply a service. 
 
 
                                                            
6 For greater certainty , this paragraph does not cover treatment accorded by the United Kingdom to 
services and service suppliers of territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is 
responsible . 
7 Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.   
Article 8.6 
Local Presence 
 
Neither Party shall require a service supplier of the other Party to 
establish or maintain a representative office or any form of  enterprise, or to 
be resident, in its territory as a condition for the cross -border supply of a 
service.  
 
 
Article 8.7 
Non-Conforming Measures  
 1.  Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured-Nation 
Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) and Article 8.6 (Local Presence) do 
not apply to: 
 
(a)  any existing non- conforming measure that is maintained by a Party 
at:  
 
(i)  the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; 
 
(ii)  a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; or  
 
(iii)  a local level of government; 
 
(b)  the continuation or prompt renewal of any non- conforming measure 
referred to in subparagraph (a); or 
 
(c)  an amendment to any non- conforming measure referred to in 
subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most -
Favoured- Nation Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) or Article 
8.6 (Local Presence) . 
 2.  Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most -Favoured-Nation 
Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) and Article 8.6 (Local Presence)  do 
not apply to any measure of a Party with respect to sectors, sub -sectors or 
activities, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex II.  
 
3.  If a Party considers that a non -conforming measure applied by a regional 
level of government of the other Party, as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(ii),  creates a material impediment to the cross- border supply of services in 
relation to the former Party, it may request consultations with regard to that 
measure.  The Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging 
information on the operation of the measure and to considering whether 
further steps are necessary and appropriate.8 
 
 
Article 8.8 
Domestic Regulation  
 
1. For the purposes of this Article:  
 
“authorisation” means permission for the cross -border supply of a service or 
for the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition of a covered investment in the form of an enterprise  resulting from a procedure a person of a Party must adhere to 
in order to demonstrate compliance with licensing requirements, qualification requirements or technical standards;  
 “competent authority” means a central, regional or local government or authority or non- governmental body in the exercise of powers delegated by 
a central, regional or local government or authority , which is entitled to take 
a decision  concerning authorisa tion. 
 2. (a) Subject to subparagraph (b), this Article applies to measures of a 
Party  relating to licensing requirements and procedures, qualification 
requirements and procedures, and technical standards. 
 
(b) This Article does not apply to a measure to the extent that the measure 
is not subject to an obligation in this Chapter or Chapter 13 
(Investment) by reason of Article 8.7 (Non- Conforming Measures) or 
Article 13. 13 (Non -Conforming Measures – Investment ).  
 3. Each Party sha ll ensure that measures relating to authorisation are based on 
criteria which preclude a competent authority from exercising its power of assessment in an arbitrary manner.   If a Party adopts or maintains a measure 
relating to authorisation, it shall ensure that:  
 
(a)  those measures are based on criteria
9 that are:  
                                                            
8 For greater certainty, a Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding non -
conforming measures applied by the central level of government, as referred to in subpara graph 
1(a)(i).  
9 Those criteria may include,  but are not limited to, competence and the ability to supply a service  or 
carry out an activity  including to do so in a manner consistent with the Party’s regulatory   
(i)  clear and transparent ; 
 
(ii)  objective; and 
 (iii)  established in advance and made publicly accessible.  
 
(b)  the procedures are impartial, easily accessible to all applicants and that the procedures are adequate for applicants to demonstrate 
whether they meet the requirement s, where those requirements exist;  
 
(c) the procedures do not in themselves unjustifiably prevent the 
fulfilment of requirements; and  
 (d)  those measures do not discriminate between men and women .
10 
 
4.  ( a) If a Party requires authorisation, the Party shall promptly publish11  
the information necessary for service suppliers of a Party  or persons 
carrying out or seeking to carry out the activity for which 
authorisation is required to comply with the requirements and 
procedures for obtaining, maintaining, amending and renewing that authorisation.  Each Party shall ensure that this information is easily 
accessible through electronic means.  Where it exists, that information  
shall include but is not limited to:  
 
(i) the requirements and procedures;  
 
(ii) contact information of relevant competent authorities; 
 
(iii) fees;  
 
(iv) technical standards;  
 
(v) procedures for appeal or review of decisions  concerning 
applications;  
 
                                                            
requirements, such as health and environmental requirements.   Competent authorities may assess the 
weight to be given to each criterion.  
10 Differential treatment that is reasonable and objective, and aims to achieve a legitimate purpose, 
and adoption by a Party of temporary special measures aimed at accelerating de facto  equality between 
men and women, shall not be considered discrimination for the purposes of this subparagraph.  
11 For purposes of these disciplines, "publish" means to include in an official publication, such as an 
official journal, or on an official website.  Each  Party is encouraged to consolidate electronic 
publications into a single portal.  (vi) procedures for monitoring or enforcing compliance with the 
terms and conditions of licences or qualifications; 
 
(vii) opportunities for public involvement, such as through hearings or comments ; 
 
(viii) indicative or, to the extent possible, fixed timeframes for 
processing of an application; and 
 
(ix)  the length of authorisation, and where relevant, the date of its 
renewal . 
 
b) Each Party shall require its competent authorities to respond to any reasonable request for information or assistance, to the extent 
practicable.  
 
5.  If a Party requires authorisation, it shall, to the extent practicable ensure that 
its competent authorities avoid requiring an applicant to approach more than one competent authority for each application for authorisation, recognising  
that if an activity for which authorisation is requested is within the jurisdiction of multiple competent authorities, multiple applications for authorisation may be required. 
 6.  If a Party requires authorisation, it shall ensure that its competent autho rities: 
 
(a)  to the extent practicable, permit the submission of an application at any time throughout the year .
12  If a specific time period for applying 
exists, the Party shall ensure that its competent authorities allow a reasonable period of time for t he submission of an application; 
 (b)  to the extent possible , accept applications in electronic format.  For 
greater certainty, this includes applications made from within the 
territory of the other Party; 
 
(c) accept copies of documents, that are authenticated in accordance with 
the Party’s law, in place of original documents, unless the competent authorities require original documents to protect the integrity of the 
authorisation process; 
 
(d)  to the extent practicable, publish in advance a fixed or indicative 
timeframe for processing of an application;  
 
                                                            
12 For greater certainty , competent  authorities are not required to start considering applications outside 
of their official working hours and working days.  (e) at the request of the applicant, provide without undue delay 
information concerning the status of the application; 
 (f)  to the extent practicable, ascertain without undue delay the completene ss of an application for processing under the Party’s laws 
and regulations; 
 (g)  if they  consider an application complete for processing under the 
Party’s laws and regulations ,
13 within a reasonable period of time 
after the submission of the applications, ensure that:  
 
(i)  
the
 processing of the application is completed;  
 (ii)  the applicant is informed of the decision concerning the application
14 to the extent possible in writing ;15 and 
 
(iii)  an authorisation is granted as soon as the competent authority 
determines that the conditions for authorisation have been met; 
 (h) i f they  consider an application incomplete for processing under the 
Party’s laws and regulations, within a reasonable period of time, to 
the extent practicable:  
 
(i)  inform the applicant that the application is incomplete;  
 
(ii)  at the request of an applicant, identify the additional 
information required to complete the application and provide 
guidance to the  applicant about the type of information 
required to complete the application ; and 
 
(iii)  provide the applicant with the opportunity
16 to correct 
deficiencies;  
 however, if none of the above is practicable, and the application is rejected due to incomplet eness, ensure that they inform the applicant 
within a reasonable period of time; and  
                                                            
13 Competent authorities may require that all information is submitted in a specified format to consider 
it "complete for pr ocessing". 
14 Competent authorities may meet this requirement by informing an applicant in advance, in writing, 
including through a published measure, that lack of response after a specified period of time from the 
date of submission of an application indicates accepta nce of the application.  
15 "In writing" may include in electronic form.  
16 The opportunity does not require a competent authority to provide extensions of deadlines.   
(i) i f an application is rejected, to the extent possible, either upon their 
own initiative or upon request of the applicant, inform the applicant of the reasons for rejection and, if applicable, the procedures for resubmission of an application.  An applicant should not be prevented 
from submitting another application
17 solely on the basis of a 
previously rejected application. 
 7.  Each  Party shall ensure that authorisation, once granted, enters into effect 
without undue delay, subject to applicable terms and conditions.
18 
 
8.  Each Party shall ensure that the authorisation fees19 charged by its competent 
authorities are made public, reaso nable, transparent, and do not in themselves 
restrict the supply of the relevant service or the carrying out  of the relevant 
activity.   Each Party is encouraged to accept payment of authorisation fees 
by electronic means.  
 
9.  If a Party requires examinati ons for authorisation, it shall: 
 
(a)  ensure that its competent authorities schedule the examination at reasonably frequent intervals and provide a reasonable period of time to enable applicants to request to take the examination; and  
 (b)  to the extent practicable, accept requests in electronic format to take those examinations and consider the use of electronic means in other aspects of the examination processes.  
 
10.  If a Party adopts or maintains a measure relating to authorisation, it shall 
ensure that its competent authority processes an application, reaches and administers its decisions objectively, impartially and in a manner independent from any supplier of the service or person carrying out the 
activity  for which authorisation is required .
20 
 11.  Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner. 
 
                                                            
17 Competent authorities may require that the content of the application has been revised.  
18 Competent authorities are not responsible for delays due to reasons outside their competence.  
19 Authorisation fees do not include fees for the use of natural resources, payments for auction, 
tendering or other non- discriminat ory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to 
universal service obligation.  
20 For greater certainty,  this paragraph does not ma ndate a particular administrative structure; it refers 
to the decision -making process and administering of decisions .  12.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for 
adopting measures, each Party21 shall publish in advance: 
 
(a)  laws or regulations of general application it proposes to adopt in relation to matters falling within the scope of paragraph 2; or  
 
(b)  documents that provide sufficient details about that possible new  law 
or regulation to allow interested persons or the other Party to assess 
whether and how their interests might be significantly affected.  
 13.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for 
adopting measures, each Party is encouraged to apply paragraph 12 to procedures and administrative rulings of general application it proposes to adopt in relation to matters falling within the scope of paragraph 2. 
 14.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for 
adopting measures, each Party shall provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on those proposed measures or documents published under paragraphs 12 and 13. 
 15.  To the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for adopting measures, each Party shall consider comments received under 
paragraph 14.
22 
 
16.  In publishing a law or regulation referred to in subparagraph 12(a), or in advance of that publication, to the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system for adopting measures, a Party is encouraged 
to explain the purpose and rationale of that law or regulation. 
 
17.  Each Party shall, to the extent practicable, endeavour to allow reasonable time between the publication of the text of a law or regulation referred to in 
subparagraph 12(a) and the date on which service suppliers of a Party or 
persons carrying out or seeking to carry out an activity must comply with that 
law or regulation.  
 18.  Each Party shall encourage its competent authorities, when adopting technical standards, to adopt technical standards developed through open and 
transparent processes, and shall encourage any body, including relevant 
                                                            
21 Paragraphs 12 to 15 recognise that each Party has different systems to consult interested persons 
on certain measures before they are adopted, and that the alternatives set out in  paragraph 12 reflect 
different legal systems.  
22 This paragraph is without prejudice to the final  decision of a Party that adopts or maintains any 
measure for authorisation.  international organisations ,23 designate d to develop technical standards to 
use open and transparent processes.  
 
19.  If the number of licences available for a given activity is limited because of the scarcity of available natural resources or technical capacity, a Party shall apply a selection procedure to potential candidates which is impartial and 
transparent and provides for adequate publicity about the launch, conduct and 
completion of the procedure.  The selection procedure  may take into account 
legitimate policy objectives, including consi derations of health, safety, the 
protection of the environment and the preservation of cultural heritage. 
 20.  Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for 
responding to enquiries from service suppliers of a Party and persons carrying  out or seeking to carry out an activity. 
  
Article 8.9 
Recognition 
 1.  For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of a Party’s standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, the  Party may recognise the  
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of a non -Party.  That recognition, which 
may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or arrangement with the non- Party concerned, or may be accorded 
autonomously. 
 2.  If a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement, the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of a non -Party, nothing in Article 8.4 
(Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment)  or Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured- Nation 
Treatment  – Investment ) shall be construed to require the Party to accord 
recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of the other Party. 
 3.  If a Party is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in 
paragraph 1, whether existing or future, t he Party shall afford adequate 
opportunity to the other Party, on request, to negotiate its accession to that 
agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement.   If a Party accords recognition  autonomously, the Party shall 
afford adequate opportunity to the other Party to demonstrate that education, 
                                                            
23 The term “ relevant international organisations" refers to international bodies whose membership is 
open to the relevant bodies of each Party.  experience, licences or certifications obtained or requirements met in that 
Party’s territory should be recognised. 
 
4.  Neither Party shall accord recognition in a manner that would constitute a means of discrimination between a Party and a non -Party in the application 
of its standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of 
service suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in services.  
 
 
Article 8.10 
Denial of Benefits  
 
A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of 
the other Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to services of that services supplier if persons of a non -Party own or control the enterprise, and 
the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non- Party 
or a person of the non- Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or 
that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise or to services of that enterprise.  
  
Article 8.11 
Transparency  
 1.  Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for responding to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations that relate to the subject matter of this Chapter.
24 
 2.  If a Party does not provide advance notice and opportunity for comment pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 28.2 (Publication  – Transparency and Anti -
Corruption ) with respect to regulations that relate to the subject matter in this 
Chapter, it shall, to the extent practicable, provide in writing or otherwise 
notify interested persons of the reasons for not doing so. 
 
3.  To the extent possible, each Party shall allow reasonable time between publication of final regulations and the date when they enter into effect. 
 
 
Article 8.12 
Payments and Transfers 
 
                                                            
24 The implementation of the obligat ion to maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms may need to 
take into account the resource and budget constraints of small administrative agencies.  1.  Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments that relate to the cross-
border supply of services to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.  
 2.  Each Party shall permit transfers and payments that relate to the cross- border 
supply of services t o be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate 
of exchange that prevails at the time of transfer.  
 3.  Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer 
or payment through the equitable, non- discriminatory and good faith 
application of its law
25 that relates to:  
 
(a)  bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors; 
 
(b)  issuing, trading or dealing in securities or derivatives; 
 
(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;  
 
(d)  criminal or penal offences; or  
 
(e)  ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or 
administrative proceedings.  
 
 
Article 8.13 
Committee  on Services and Investment  
 1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Services and Investment, 
composed of government representatives of each Party.
26 
 2.  The Committee shall:  
 
(a)  review and monitor the implementation and operation of this Chapter (which includes  Annex 8A (Express Delivery Services) and Annex 
8B (International Maritime Transport Services)), Chapter 9 (Financial Services) (which includes Annex 9A (Cross -Border Trade 
in Financial Services), Annex 9B (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) and Annex 9C (Financia l Services Regulatory 
Cooperation)), Chapter 10 (Professional Services and the 
                                                            
25 For greater certainty, this Article does not preclude the equitable, non -discriminatory and good faith  
application of a Party’s law relating to its social security, public retirement or compulsory savings 
programmes.  
26 Representatives of the authorities responsible for financial services as specified in Annex 9 B 
(Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) will discuss matters relating to financial services.  Recognition of Professional Qualifications), Chapter 11 (Temporary 
Entry for Business Persons), Chapter 12 (Telecommunications), Chapter 13 (Investment), and Chapter 14 (Digital  Trade) (“the 
relevant Chapters”);  
 (b) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment between the 
Parties, including through amendments to each Party’s Schedules 
to Annex I (Schedules of Non- conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment), Annex II (Schedules of Non- conforming Measures for 
Services and Investment), Annex III (Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures for Financial Services)  and Annex IV (Schedules of 
Specific Commitments on Temporary Entry  for Business 
Persons);  and 
 (c) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties in relation to the relevant Chapters.  
 3. The Committee may:  
 
(a)  make recommendations, or refer matters, to the Joint Committee;  
 
(b)  establish ad hoc  working groups, as appropriate;  
 
(c) refer matters to any ad hoc  or standing working group or any other 
subsidiary body related to the relevant Chapters; and 
 
(d)  consider any other matter related to the relevant Chapters, or as 
directed by the Joint Committee.   
 
4. The Committee shall meet one year after entry into force, and thereafter as agreed by both Parties. 
 
5. The Committee shall report to the Joint Committee.