9 - 1 CHAPTER 9 
 
FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
 
Article 9.1 
Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
 
“cross -border financial service supplier”  means a person of a Party that is 
engaged in the business of supplying a financial service within the territory of the Party and that seeks to supply or supplies a financial service through the cross-border supply of that service;   “cross -border trade in financial services” or “ cross- border supply of financial 
services” means the supply of a financial service:  
 
(a)  from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;  
 
(b)  in the territory of a Party to a person of the other Party; or  
 (c)  by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party, 
 but does not include the supply of a financial service in the territory of a Party by an investment in that territory;  
 “commercial presence”  means any type of business or professional 
establishment, including through:  
(a)  the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of an enterprise; 
or 
 (b)  the creation or maintenance of a branch or representative  
office,  
 within the territory of a Party for the  purposes of supplying a service , 
including a financial service;  
 “electronic payments” means the payer’s transfer of a monetary claim 
acceptable to the payee made through electronic means;  
 “enterprise of a Party” means:  
 
(a)  an enterprise constituted or  organised under the law of that 
Party and carrying out substantial business activities in the territory of that Party; or9 - 2 
 
 (b)  an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the law of 
that Party and is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by  
a national of that Party or by an enterprise referred to in subparagraph (a); 
 “established financial service supplier” means a financial service supplier that supplies a financial service through commercial presence;  
 “established financial service suppl ier of the other Party ” means an 
established financial service supplier  located in the territory of a Party that is 
controlled by a person of the other Party;  “financial service supplier”  means any person of a Party seeking to supply or 
supplying financial services, but does not include a public entity;  “financial service ” means any service of a financial nature, including all 
insurance and insurance related services , all banking and other financial 
services (excluding insurance),  and services incidental or auxiliary to a 
service of a financial nature. Financial services include the following activities:  
 
Insurance and insurance- related services  
 
(a)  direct insurance (including co -insurance):  
 
(i)  life;  
 (ii)  non- life;  
 
(b)  reinsurance and retrocession;  
 (c)  insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; and  
 (d)  services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment , and claim settlement services;  
 
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)  
 
(e)  acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public; 
 (f)  lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring, and financing of commercial transactions; 
 (g)  financial leasing;9 - 3 
 
 (h)  all payment and money transmission services, including 
credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques, and bankers 
drafts;  
 (i)  guarantees and commitments;  
 (j)  trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in an over- the-counter market or otherwise, 
the following: 
 
(i) money market instruments (including cheques, bills or certificates of deposits);  
 (ii)  foreign exchange; 
  (iii)  derivative products including futures and options; 
 (iv)  exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as swaps, forward rate agreements;  
 (v)  transferable securities; or  
 
(vi)  other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion; 
 
(k)  participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately), and provision of services related to those issues;  
 (l)  money broking; 
 (m)  asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of collective investment management, pension fund 
management, custodial, depository, and trust services;  
 (n)  settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;  
 (o)  provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related sof tware by suppliers of other 
financial services;  and 
 (p)  advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities listed in subparagraphs (e) through (o) , 
including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, and advice on acquisitions and 
on corporate restructuring and strategy;9 - 4 
 
  
"financial service computing facility" means a computer server or storage device for the processing or storage of information for commercial use but does not include computer servers or storage devices of, or used to operate , 
financial market infrastructures;  
 “financial market infrastructures” means systems in which financial service suppliers participate with other financial service suppliers, including the operator of the system, used for the purposes of  clearing, settling,  or 
recording of payments, securities , derivatives , or other financial transactions; 
 “investment”  means “investment” as defined in Art icle 13.1 (Definitions - 
Investment ),
1 except that for the purposes of this Chapte r, with respect to 
“loans” and “debt instruments” referred to in that Article:  
 
(a)  a loan to or debt instrument issued by an established financial 
service supplier is an investment only if it is treated as regulatory capital by the Party in whose territory the established financial service supplier is located; and  
 (b)  a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by an established 
financial service supplier , other than a loan to or debt 
instrument issued by an established financial service supplier  
referred to in subparagraph (a), is not an investment; 
 “investor”  means a Party, or a person of a Party, that attempts to make ,
2 is 
making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party;  “new financial service”  means a financial service, including services related 
to existing and new products or the manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied by any financial service supplier in the territory of a Party, 
but which is supplied in the territory of the other Party;  
 “person of a Party ” means a national or an enterprise of a Party  and, for 
greater certainty, does not include a branch of an enterprise of a non -party; 
 “public entity”  means:  
 
(a)  a government, a central bank or a monetary authority of a Party or any entity owned or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in carrying out governmental functions or 
                                                            
1 For greater certainty, a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a cross -border financial service 
supplier, other than a loan to or debt instrument issued by  an established financial service supplier, is 
an investment for the purposes of Chapter 13  (Investment) , if that loan or debt instrument meets the 
criteria for “investment” set out in Article 13.1 (Definitions - Investment).  
2  For greater certainty, the Parties understand that an investor “attempts to make” an investment when 
that investor has  taken concrete action or actions to make an investment, such as channelling resources 
or capital in order to set up a business, or applying for permits or licences.9 - 5 
 
 activities for governmental purposes, not including an entity 
principally engaged in supplying financial services on commercial terms; or  
 (b)  a private entity performing functions normally performed by a central bank or monetary authority when exercising those functions; and  
 “self-regulatory organisation”  means any non- governmental body, including 
any securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or  other 
organisation or association, that exercises regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service suppliers by statute or delegation from central  or 
regional government.  
  
Article 9.2 
Scope  
 1.  This Chapter applies to any measure adopted or maintained by a Party 
affecting trade in financial services with respect to:  
 
(a)  an established financial service supplier of the other Party;  
 (b)  an investor of the other Party, and an investment  of that investor, in 
an established financial service supplier  in the Party’s territory; and  
 (c)  cross- border financial service suppliers.  
 2.  Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services) and Chapter 13 (Investment)  
apply to measures described in paragraph 1 only to the extent that those Chapters or Articles of those Chapters are incorporated into this Chapter:  
 
(a)  Article 8.10 (Denial of Benefits – Cross -Border Trade in Services),  
Article 13.7 (Minimum Standard of Treatment – Investment), Article 
13.8 (Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife – 
Investment), Article 13.9 (Expropriation and Compensation – 
Investment), Article 13.10 (Transfers – Investment), Article 13. 14 
(Subrogation – Investment), Article 13.15 (Special Formalities and 
Information Requirements – Investment), Article 13.16 (Denial of 
Benefits – Investment), Article 13.17 (Investment and Environmental, 
Health and other Regulatory Objectives – Investment), Article 13.18 
(Investment and the Environment – Investment), and Article 13.19 
(Corporate Social Responsibility – Investment) are incorporated into 
and made a part of this Chapter ; and   
 (b)  Article 8.12 ( Payments and Transfers – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services ) is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter to the 
extent that cross- border trade in financial services is subject to9 - 6 
 
 obligations pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article  9.5 ( National 
Treatment) and subparagraph 1(c) of Article 9.6 (Market Access) . 
 
3.  This Chapter does not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party 
relating to:  
 
(a)  activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or statutory system of social security; or  
 (b)  activities or services conducted for the account or with the guarantee or using the financial resources of the Party, including its public entities,  
 
except that this Chapter  applies to the extent that a Party allows any of the 
activities or services referred to in subparagraph (a) or (b) to be conducted by its financial service suppliers in competition with a public entity  or a financial 
service supplier.  
 4.  This Chapter does not apply to government procurement of financial 
services.  
 5.  This Chapter does  not apply to subsidies or grants  provided by a Party with 
respect to the supply of financial services, including government -supported 
loans, guarantees and insurance.  
 6.  This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of the other Party who seeks access to its employment market or who is employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not confer any right on that national with res pect to that access or employment.   For 
greater certainty, this Chapter does not apply to measures regarding citizenship, nationality or residence on a permanent basis.  
  
Article 9.3  
Prudential Exception 
 1.  Notwithstanding any other provisions  of this Chapter and Agreement except 
for Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin and Origin 
Procedures), Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures  and Trade Facilitation), 
Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) , and Chapter 7 (Technical 
Barriers to Trade), a Party shall not be prevented  from adopting or 
maintaining measures for prudential reasons ,
3 including:  
 
(a) the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders, or persons to whom a financial service supplier owes a fiduciary duty; 
 
                                                            
3 The Parties understand that the term ‘prudential reasons’ includes the  maintenance of th e safety, 
soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility  of payment, settlement and clearing systems.9 - 7 
 
 (b)  the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial 
responsibility of an established financial service supplier or, a cross-border financial service supplier; or  
 (c)  ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party’s financial system.  
 2.  Where those measures do not conform with the provisions of this Agreement 
to which this exception applies , they shall not be used as a means of avoiding 
the Party's commitments or obligations under those provisions.  
  
Article 9.4  
Specific Exceptions  
 1.  Nothing in this Chapter, Chapter 8 (Cross -Border Trade in Services), 
Chapter 12 (Telecommunications) , Chapter 13 (Investment)  or Chapter 14  
(Digital Trade ), shall  apply to measures taken or activities conducted by a 
central bank or  monetary authority or  by any other  public entity in pursuit of 
monetary policies  and related credit policies, or exchange rate policies. This 
paragraph shall not affect a Party’s obligations under Article 13.11 
(Performance Requirements – Investment)  with respect to measures 
covered by Chapter 13 (Investment) , under Article 13.10 (Transfers – 
Investment)  or Article 8.12 (Payments and Transfers – Cross -Border Trade 
in Services) . 
 2.  Nothing in this Chapter shall require a Party to:  
 
(a)  furnish or allow access to information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial service suppliers or to any confidential or proprietary information which, if disclosed, would impede law enforcement, interfere with specific regulatory or supervisory matters, or would otherwise be contrary to public interest or prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises ; 
or 
 (b)  disclose confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.9 - 8 
 
 Article 9. 5 
National Treatment4  
 
1.  Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less 
favourable than that it accords , in like circumstances,  to its own investors 
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, 
conduct, operation, and  sale or other disposition  of established financial 
service suppliers, and investments in established financial service suppliers 
in its territory.  
 
2.  Each Party shall accord to established financial service suppliers of the other 
Party, and to investments of investors of the other Party in established 
financial service suppliers, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, 
in like circumstances, to its own established financial service suppliers, and 
to investments of its own investors in established financial service suppliers  
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, 
conduct, operation, and  sale or other disposition  of established financial 
service suppliers and investments.  
 
3.  Each Party shall accord to:  
 
(a)  financial services as specified by the Party in Annex 9A (Cross -
Border Trade in Financial Services ) or cross -border financial servic e 
suppliers of the other Party seeking to supply or supplying those 
financial services; and  
 (b)  cross- border financial service suppliers of the other Party seeking to 
supply or supplying financial services as defined in subparagraph (b) or subparagraph (c)  of the definition of “ cross- border trade in 
financial services” or financial services supplied through that cross-
border trade, 
 
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to 
its own financial services and financial service suppliers .  
 4.  For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1  through 3 means, with respect to a regional level of government, 
treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regi onal level of government to established 
financial service suppliers, investors, and investments of those investors in established financial service suppliers, or financial services or financial 
service suppliers,  of the Party of which it forms a part.  
 
                                                            
4 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 9.5 
(National Treatment) or Article 9.8 ( Most- Favoured- Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the 
circumstances, including whether the relevant  treatment distinguishes between investors, 
investments, established financial service suppliers or financial service suppliers on the basis of 
legitimate public welfare objectives.9 - 9 
 
 Article 9. 6 
Market Access  
 
1.  A Party shall not adopt or maintain, with respect to:  
 
(a)  an established financial service supplier of the other Party;  
 (b)   an investor or an investment of an investor of the other Party in an established financial service supplier in the Party’s territory; or 
 (c)  a cross -border financial service supplier of the other Party:  
 
(i) seeking to supply or supplying the financial services as specified by the Party in Annex 9A ( Cross -Border Trade in 
Financial Services ); or 
 (ii)  seeking to supply or supplying financial services as defined in subparagraph (b)  or subparagraph (c)  of the definition of 
“cross -border trade in financial services ”, 
 
either on the basis of its entire territory or on the basis of the territory of a central, regional, or local level of government, a measure that:  
 
(d)  imposes limitations on:  
 
(i)  the number of established financial service suppliers or cross -
border financial service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;  
 (ii)  the total value of financial service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;  
 (iii)  the total number of financial service operations or the total quantity of financial services output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the 
requirement of an economic needs test ;
5  
 (iv)
  the
 participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum 
percentage limit on foreign shareholding in established financial service suppliers or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment in established financial service suppliers;  
 
                                                            
5 Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of 
financial services.9 - 10 
 
 (v)  the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a 
particular financial services sector or that an established financial service supplier or cross- border financial service 
supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific financial service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or  
 
(e)  restricts or requires specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which an established financial service supplier or cross -
border financial service supplier may supply a service.  
 2.  For greater certainty, this Article does not prevent a Party imposing terms, conditions, and procedures for the authorisation of the establishment and expansion of a commercial presence in so far as they do not circumvent the Party’s obligation under paragraph 1 and are consistent with the other provisions of this Chapter.  
 
 
Article 9.7  
Local Presence 
 
Neither Party shall require a cross- border financial service supplier of 
the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office, or an enterprise or a branch of an enterprise, or to be resident in its territory, as a condition for the cross -borde r supply of a financial service.  With respect to 
cross- border supply as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “ cross-
border trade in financial services”, this Article only applies to the financial services specified by the Party in Annex 9A ( Cross -Border Trade in Financial 
Services ). 
  
Article 9.8  
Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment 
 1.  Each Party shall accord to:   
 
(a)  investors and investments of investors of the other Party in established financial service suppliers, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors and investments of investors of a non- party in established financial service suppliers;  
 (b)  established financial service suppliers of the other Party, treatment no less favourable than  that it accords, in like circumstances, to 
established financial service suppliers of a non -party; 
 (c)  financial services or cross- border financial service suppliers of the 
other Party, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like9 - 11 
 
 circumst ances, to financial services and cross -border financial service 
suppliers of a non- party .6 
 
2.  For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not encompass international dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms.  
 
 
Article 9. 9 
Senior Management and Boards of Directors  
 1.  Neither Party shall require established financial service suppliers of the other Party, to engage natural persons of any particular nationality as members of the board of directors, senior managerial or other essential personnel.   
 2.  Neither Party shall require that more than a minority of the board of directors of established financial service suppliers of the other Party be composed of persons residing in the territory of the Party. 
  
Article 9. 10 
Non-Conforming Measures  
 1.  Article 9.5 (National Treatment), Article 9.6 (Market Access),  Article 9.7 
(Local Presence), Article 9.8 ( Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment ) and Article 
9.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do not apply to: 
 
(a)  any existing non- conforming measure that is maintained by a Party 
at:  
 
(i)  the central level of government, as set out in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III (Schedules of Non -Conforming 
Measure s for Financial Services) ; 
 (ii)  a regional level of government, as set out in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III (Schedules of Non -Conforming 
Measure s for Financial Services) ; or 
 
(iii)  a local level of government; 
 
(b)  the continuation or prompt renewal of any non- conforming measure 
referred to in subparagraph (a);  
 
                                                            
6 For greater certainty, this paragraph does not cover treatment accorded by the United Kingdom to 
investors and investments of investors in established financial services suppliers, established financial service suppliers, financial services or cross -border financial service suppliers of territories 
for whose international relations the United Kingdom is resp onsible.9 - 12 
 
 (c)  an amendment to any non- conforming measure referred to in 
subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease 
the conformity of the me asure, as it existed  immediately before the 
amendment, with Article 9.5 (National Treatment), Article 9.6 (Market Access), Article 9. 7 (Local Presence), Article 9.8 ( Most -
Favoured- Nation Treatment ), or Article 9.9 (Senior Management and 
Boards of Directors); or  
 (d)  any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out in Section B of its Schedule to 
Annex III (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measure for Financia l 
Services) . 
 2.  Neither Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule, require an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.   
 3.  Where Article 8.3 (National Treatment – Cross -Border Trade in Services), 
Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured- Nation Treatment – Cross -Border Trade in 
Services) , Article 8.5 (Market Access – Cross -Border Trade in Services ), 
Article 8.6 (Local Presence – Cross -Border Trade in Services ), Article 13.4 
(Market Access – Investment), Article 13.5 (National Treatment - 
Investment), Article 13.6 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment –  Investment),  
or Article 13.12 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors - Investment)   
do not apply to a measure due to that measure being: 
 
(a)  set out by a Party as a non- conforming measure in its Schedule to 
Annex I (Schedules of Non- Conforming Measures for Services and 
Investment) ; or  
 (b)  a measure which a Party may adopt or maintain under an entry set out by a Party in its Schedule to Annex II ( Schedules of Non-Conforming 
Measures for Services and Investment), 
 
that measure shall be treated as a non -conforming measure not subject to 
Article 9.5 (National Treatment), Article 9.6 (Market Access),  Article 9.7 
(Local Presence),  Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured- Nation Treatment ), or Article 
9.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors), as the case may be, to the 
extent that the measure is covered by this Chapter.  
 4.  Article 9.5 (National Treatment) and Article 9. 8 (Most -Favoured-Nation 
Treatment ) shall not apply to any measure that falls within Article 5 of the 
TRIPS Agreement, and any measure that is covered by an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations imposed by Article 15.8 (National 
Treatment  – Intellectual Property ), or by Article 3 or Article 4 of the TRIPS 
Agreement.9 - 13 
 
 Article 9.11 
Transparency  
 
1.  Articles 26.2 (General Provision s –  Good Regulatory Practice), 26.6 (Public 
Consultation – Good Regulatory Practice), 26.10 (Regulatory Cooperation –  
Good Regulatory Practice) , and 26.11 ( Contact Points  – Good Regulatory 
Practice) and Articles 28.2 (Publication – Transparency  and Anti -
Corruption) , 28.3 (Administrative Proceedings – Transparency  and Anti -
Corruption),  and 28.5 (Provision of Information – Transparency  and Anti -
Corruption)  do not apply to a measure covered by this Chapter.  
 2.  The Parties recognise that transparent measures governing the activities of financial service suppliers are important in facilitating their ability to gain access to and operate in each other’s markets. Each Party commits to promote 
regulatory transparency in financial services.  
 3.  Each Party shall:  
 
(a)  ensure that all measures of general application to which this Chapter applies are administered in a reasonab le, objective, and impartial 
manner;  
 (b)  ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general application to which this Chapter applies are promptly published or made available in a manner that enables an 
interested perso n and the other Party to become acquainted with them;  
 (c)  to the extent practicable, ensure advance publication of any law s, 
regulations, procedures , and administrative rulings of general 
application to which this Chapter applies that it proposes to adopt  and 
their purpose, and provide an interested person and the other Party a 
reasonable opportunity to comment on them ;  
 (d)  maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms to respond, within a reasonable period of time, to an inquiry or a request for information from an interested person and the other Party regarding measures of general application to which this Chapter applies;  
 (e)  allow, to the extent practicable, a reasonable period of time between the publication of a final law or regulation of general application to which this Chapter applies and the date when it enters into effect; and  
 (f)  ensure that the rules of general application adopted or maintained by a self -regulatory organisation of the Party, to which this Chapter 
applies, are promptly published or otherwise made available in a manner that enables interested persons to become acquainted with them.9 - 14 
 
 4.  In developing a new law or regulation of general application to which this 
Chapter applies, a Party may consider, in a manner consistent with its law 
and regulations, comments regarding how the proposed law or regulation of general application may affect the operations of financial service supplier s, 
including financial service suppliers of the Party or the other Party. These comments may include: 
 
(a)  submissions to a Party by the other Party regarding its regulatory measures that are related to the objectives of the proposed law or regulation of general application; or  
 (b)  submissions to a Party by interested persons, including the other Party or financial service suppliers of the other Party, with regard to the potential effects of the proposed law or regulation of general application.  
 5.  Before the competent authority of a Party adopts a final law or regulation of general application, a Party shall, to the extent practicable, address in writing the substantive comments received from interested persons with respect to the proposed law or regulation of general application.
7  
 6.  If a Party adopts or maintains measures relating to authorisation for the supply of a service, the Party shall ensure that: 
 
(a)  the competent authority reaches and admi nisters its decisions in a 
manner independent from any supplier of the services for which authorisation is required ;
8   
 (b)  those measures are based on objective and transparent criteria;
9  
 (c)  the procedures are impartial, and that the procedures are adequate for applicants to demonstrate whether they meet the requirements, if those requirements exist;  
 (d)  the procedures do not in themselves unjustifiably prevent fulfilment of requirements; a nd 
 (e)  those measures do not discriminate on the basis of gender .
10 
 
                                                            
7 For greater certainty, a Party may address those comments collectively on an official website.  
8For greater certainty, this provision does not mandate a particular administrative structure; it refers 
to the decision -making process and administering of decisions.  
9 Those criteria may include  competence and the ability to supply a service, including to do so in a 
manner consistent with a Party’s regulatory requirements. Competent authorities may assess the 
weight to be given to each crite rion. 
10 Differential treatment that is reasonable and objective, and aims to achieve a legitimate purpose, 
and adoption by Parties of temporary special measures aimed at accelerating de facto  equality across 
all genders, shall not be considered discrimination for the purposes of this provision.9 - 15 
 
 7.  If a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a financial service, the 
competent authorities of the Party shall:  
 
(a)  make publicly available the information necessary for financial 
service suppliers to comply with the requirements and procedures for obtaining, maintaining, amending, and renewing that  authorisation.  
 Where it exists, that information shall include: 
 
(i)  fees;  
 (ii)  contact information of competent authorities; 
 (iii)  procedures for appeal or review of decisions concerning applications;  
 (iv)  procedures for monitoring or enforcing compliance with the terms and conditions of licences; 
 (v)  opportunities for public involvement, such as through heari ngs 
or comments;  
 (vi)  indicative timeframes for processing of an application; and 
 (vii)  any other relevant requirements and procedures; 
 
(b)  avoid, to the extent practicable, requiring an applicant to approach more than one competent authority for each application for authorisation. If a service is within the jurisdiction of multiple 
competent authorities, multiple applications for authorisation may be required; 
 (c)  permit, to the extent practicable, submission of an application at any time throughout the year .
11  If a specific time period for applying 
exists, the Party shall ensure that the regulatory authorities allow a reasonable period for the submission of an application; 
 (d)  taking into account their competing priorities and resource constraints, endeavour to accept applications in electronic format;  
 (e)  accept copies of documents, that are authenticated in accordance with the Party’s law s and regulations, in place of original documents, 
unless the competent authorities require original documents to protect the integrity of the authorisation process; 
 
                                                            
11 Competent authorities are not required to start considering applications outside of their official 
working hours and working days.9 - 16 
 
 (f)  ensure that the authorisation fees charged by its competent authorities 
are reasonabl e, transparent and do not in themselves restrict the 
supply of the relevant service;  
 
(g)  make an administrative decision on a complete application of a financial service supplier of the other Party, relating to the supply of a financial service within a  reasonable period of time, in line with each 
Party’s law.  An application is not considered complete until the 
competent authority has received all necessary information and all relevant hearings, if any, have been held;  
 (h)  on request of an applicant, inform the applicant of the status of their 
application without undue delay;  
 (i)  if they require additional information from the applicant, notify the applicant without undue delay;
12 
 (j)  promptly notify the applicant of the outcome of their application ,
13 to 
the extent possible, in writing;14 
 (k)  before rejecting an application for authorisation, notify the applicant with the relevant reasons and give the applicant the opportunity to make representations in support of the application;  
 (l)  on request of an unsuccessful applicant, to the extent possible, inform the applicant of the reasons for denial of the application and, if applicable, the procedures for resubmission of an application. An applicant should not be prevented from submitting a nother 
application
15 solely on the basis that an application had been 
previously rejected; and 
 (m)  ensure that authorisation, once granted, enters into effect without undue delay, subject to the applicable terms and conditions.
16 
  
    
                                                            
12 Competent authorities are not required to provide an extension of the deadline where an applicant 
is provided with the opportunity to provide additional information.   
13 Competent authorities may meet this requirement by informing an applicant in advance in writing, 
including through a published measure, that lack of response after a specified period of time from the date of submission of an application indicates acceptance of the application or rejection of the 
application.  
14 "In writing" may include in electronic form.  
15 Competent authorities may require that the content of that applic ation has been revised.  
16 Competent authorities are not responsible for delays due to reasons outside their competence.9 - 17 
 
  
Article 9.1 2 
Financial Data and Information17  
 
1.  The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements concerning the transfer of information by electronic means and the use of financial service computing facilities, including requirements that seek to ensure the security and confidentiality of communications. 
 2.  Neither Party shall prohibit or restrict a financial service supplier of the other Party from transferring , including by electronic means, information including 
personal informati on, where those transfers  are necessary for the conduct of 
the ordinary business of the financial service supplier. 
 3.  Subject to paragraphs 4 and 5, i t is prohibited for a Party to require, as a 
condition for conducting business in the Party’s territory, a financial service supplier of the other Party to use or locate financial service computing facilities, in the former Party’s territory .
18 
 4.  Each Party has the right to require a financial service supplier of the other 
Party to use or locate financial service computing facilities in the former Party’s territory, where it is not able to ensure appropriate
19 access to 
information required for the purposes of financial regulation and supervision, provided that the following conditions are met:  
 
(a)  to the extent practicable, the Party provides a financial service supplier of the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to remediate any lack of access to information; and  
 (b)  the Party or its regulatory authorities inform the other Party or its regulatory authorities before imposing any requirements to a financial service supplier of the other Party to use or locate financial service computing facilities in the former Party’s territory.  
 5.  Nothing shall restrict the right of a Party to adopt or maintain measures inconsistent with paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 to achieve a legitimate public 
policy objective such as  the protection of personal information, personal 
                                                            
17 For Australia, Article 9.12 (Financial Data and Information) does not apply to Australia’s Foreign 
Investment Framework, which comprises Australia’s Foreign Investment Policy, Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act 1975 (Cth) , Foreign Acquisitions and Tak eovers Regulation 2015 
(Cth) , Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Fees Imposition Act 2015 (Cth) , Foreign Acquisitions and 
Takeovers Fees Imposition Regulation s 2020  (Cth) , Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998 (Cth)  
and Ministerial Statements.  
18 For gr eater certainty, this prohibition also applies to circumstances in which a financial service 
supplier of the other Party uses the services of an external business for such use, storage or processing of information.    
19 For greater certainty, “appropriate” access may include sufficient, direct, regular or timely access 
that is provided without undue delay .9 - 18 
 
 privacy, and the confidentiality of individual records and accounts, provided 
that the measure:  
(a)  is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade; and   
 (b)  does not impose restrictions on transfers of information or on the use or location of computing facilities greater than are required to achieve the objective.  
 7.  This Article does not apply to information held or processed by or on behalf 
of a Party, or measures related to that information, including measures related 
to its collection.  
 8.  This Article does not apply to credit information, or related personal information, of a natural person. 
  
Article 9.1 3 
Payment and Clearing  
 
Under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party 
shall grant to established financial service suppliers of the other Party in the Party’s territory access to payment and clearing systems operated by public entities, and to official fun ding and refinancing facilities available in the 
normal course of ordinary business. This Article is not intended to confer access to the Party’s lender of last resort facilities.  
 
 
Article 9.1 4 
Performance of Back -Office Functions  
 1.  Each Party recogn ises that the performance of the back -office functions of 
an established financial service supplier in its territory by the head office or an affiliate of the established financial service supplier, or by an unrelated service supplier, either inside or out side its territory, is important to the 
effective management and efficient operation of that established financial service supplier.  Subject to paragraph 3, to the extent practicable, each Party 
shall allow the performance of those functions by the head of fice or affiliate 
of an established financial service supplier in its territory or by an unrelated service supplier .  
 2.  While a Party may require established financial service suppliers to ensure compliance with any domestic requirements applicable to t hose functions, 
they recognise the importance of avoiding the imposition of arbitrary requirements on the performance of those functions.9 - 19 
 
 3.  For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 prevents a Party from requiring 
an established financial service supplier in its territory to retain certain functions.  
 
Article 9.1 5 
Self-Regulatory Organisations 
 
If a Party requires a financial service supplier of the other Party  to be 
a member of, participate in, or have access to, a self -regulatory organisation 
to supply a financial service in or into the territory of that Party , or when the 
Party provides, directly or indirectly, privileges or advantages to financial service suppliers supplying financial services through a self -regulatory 
organisation, then the requiring Party shall ensure that the self -regulatory 
organisation observes the obligations contained in Article 9.5 (National 
Treatment)  and Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment) .   
  
Article 9.1 6 
Electronic Payments  
 1.  Noting the rapid growth of electronic payments, in particular, those provided by non- banks and FinTech enterprises, the Parties shall endeavour to support, 
subject to maintaining resilience, the development of efficient, safe, and 
secure cross -border electronic payments by:  
 
(a)  fostering the adoption and use of internationally accepted standards for electronic payments;    
 (b)  promoting interoperability and the interlinking of electronic payment 
infrastructures; and   
 (c)  encouraging innovation and competition in electronic payments.  
 2.  To this end, each Party shall , subject to maintaining resilience , endeavour to:  
 
(a)  for the electronic payment systems solely operated by a Party, 
publicly disclose objective and risk‐based criteria for participation which permit fair and open access;  
 (b)  not require all payment card transactions to be routed through a national or single electronic payment gateway; 
 (c)  adopt, for relevant electronic payment systems, international standards for electronic payment messaging for electronic data 
exchange between payment service providers and services suppliers to enable greater interoperability between electronic payment systems;9 - 20 
 
 (d)  facilitate the use of open platforms and architectures and encourage 
payment service providers to safely and securely make available new technologies and standards for their financial products and services to third parties , where possible , to facilitate greater interoperability and 
innovation in electronic payments; and 
 (e)  facilitate innovation and competition and the introduction of new 
financial and electronic payment products and services in a timely manner such as through adopting regulatory and industry sandboxes and cooperation at international fora.  
 3.  In view of paragraph 1,  the Parties recognise the importance of upholding 
safety, efficiency, trust and security in electronic payment systems through regulations, and that the adoption and enforcement of regulations and policies should be proportionate to the risks undertaken by the payment  service 
providers.  
 
 
Article 9.1 7 
Financial Services New to the Territory of a Party  
 1.  Each Party shall permit financial service suppliers of the other Party to supply a new financial service that the first Party would permit its own financial service suppliers  to supply, in like circumstances , without adopting a law or 
modifying an existing law .
20 For cross- border financial service suppliers, 
this Article only applies to the financial services specified in Annex 9A (Cross -Border Trade in Financial Services) . 
 2.  Notwithstanding subparagraph 1(e) of Article 9.6 (Market Access) , a Party 
may determine the institutional and juridical form through which the new financial service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the service. Where that  authorisation is required, a decision shall 
be made within a reasonab le time, and the authorisation may only be refused 
for prudential reasons.  
  
Article 9.1 8 
Financial Services New to the Territories of b oth Parties  
 1.  Subject to paragraph 2, each Party may permit financial service suppliers of the other Party to supply a financial service new to the territories of both Parties. For cross- border financial service suppliers, this article only applies 
to the financial serv ices specified in Annex 9A (Cross -Border Trade in 
Financial Services). 
 
                                                            
20 For greater certainty, a Party may issue a new regulation or other subordinate measure in permitting 
the supply of the new financial service.9 - 21 
 
 2.  Notwithstanding subparagraph 1(e) of Article 9.6 (Market Access) , a Party 
may determine the institutional and juridical form through which that 
financial service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the service. 
3.  For the purposes of this Article , a financial service new to the territory of both  
Parties is a financial service, including services related to existing and new 
products or the  manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied 
in a Party’s territory.  
  
Article 9. 19 
Sustainable Finance  
 1.  The Parties recognise the importance of international cooperation to facilitate the inclusion of environmental, social, and governance considerations in investment decision- making and other business activities, in order, thereby, 
to increase investment in sustainable activities.  
 2.  The inclusion of environmental considerations in investment decision-making and other business activities involves, inter alia, the assessment and pricing of climate -related risks and opportunities, and the exploration of 
environmental and sustainable proj ects and infrastructure.  
 3.  The Parties acknowledge the importance of encouraging financial service suppliers to develop an approach to managing climate -related financial risks.  
Specifically, the Parties recognise the importance of encouraging the uptak e 
of climate -related financial disclosures for financial service suppliers with 
material exposure to climate change, including forward -looking information, 
informed by initiatives in international fora, such as the Task Force on Climate -Related Financial Disclosures.  
 4.  The Parties shall cooperate in relevant international fora, and where agreeable, in the development and adoption of internationally recognised standards for the inclusion of environmental, social, and governance considerations in investment decision -making and other business activities. 
  
Article 9.2 0 
Recognition of Prudential Measures 
 1.  A Party may recognise a prudential measure of a non -party in the application 
of a measure covered by this Chapter .
21 That recognition may be: 
 
(a)  accorded autonomously;  
 (b)  achieved through harmonisation or other means; or 
                                                            
21 For greater certainty, nothing in Article 9.8 (Most -Favoured -Nation Treatment)  shall be construed 
to require a Party to accord recognition to prudential measures of the other Party.9 - 22 
 
  
(c)  based upon an agreement or arrangement with the non-party.  
 2.  A Party that accords recognition of a prudential measure under paragraph 1 to a non-party, shall provide adequate opportunity to the other Party to demonstrate that circumstances exist in which there are or would be equivalent regulation, oversight, implementation of regulation and, if appropriate, procedures concerning the sharing of information between the Parties.  
 3.  If a Party accords recognition of a prudential measure under paragraph 1(c) and the circumstances set out in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide adequate opportunity to the other Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement.  
  
Article 9.2 1 
Institutional Provisions   
 1.  The Committee  on Services and Investment  established pursuant to Article 
8.13 ( Committee on Services and Investment - Cross -Border Trade in 
Services)  shall be responsible for the effective implementation and operation 
of this Chapter.  
 2.  T he authorities responsible for financial services for each Party  are set out in 
Annex 9B (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) . 
  
Article 9.22 
Consultations  
 1.  A Party may request, in writing, consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising under this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall give sympathetic consideration to the request to hold consultat ions. The Parties shall report the results of their cons ultations to the 
Committee  on Services and Investment .  
 2.  With regard to matters relating to existing non -conforming measures 
maintained by a Party at a regional level of government as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(ii) of Article 9.10 (Non- Conforming Measures):  
 
(a)  a Party may request information on any non- conforming measure at 
the regional level of government of the other Party. Each Party’s authorities responsible for financial services as specified in Annex 9B 
(Authorities Responsible for Financial Services) shall establish a 
contact point to respond to those requests and to facilitate the9 - 23 
 
 exchange of information regarding the operation of measures covered 
by those requests; and  
 (b)  if a Party considers that a non -conforming measure applied by a 
regional level o f government of the other Party creates a material 
impediment to trade or investment by an established financial service supplier, an investor, investments in an established financial service supplier or a cross -border financial service supplier, the Party  may 
request consultations with regard to that measure. The Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging information on the operation of the measure and considering whether further steps are necessary and appropriate.  
 3.  Each Party sh all ensure that when there are consultations pursuant to 
paragraphs 1 and 2, its delegation includes officials with the relevant expertise in the area covered by this Chapter from the authorities responsible for financial services as specified in Annex 9B  (Authorities Responsible for 
Financial Services).  
 4.  For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a Party to derogate from its law regarding sharing of information between regulatory authorities, or the requirements of an agreement or arrangement between financial authorities of the Parties, or to require a regulatory authority to take any action that would interfere with specific regulatory, supervisory, administrative or enforcement matters.  
  
Article 9.23 
Dispute Settlem ent  
 1.  Chapter 30 (Dispute Settlement)  applies as modified by this Article to the 
settlement of disputes arising under this Chapter.  
 2.  The Parties shall ensure for disputes arising under this Chapter that in addition to the requirements set out in subparagraph 1(a) of Article 30.10 
(Qualifications of Panellists –  Dispute Settlement)  all panellists appointed 
in disputes arising under this Chapter shall have the necessary expertise relevant to financial services, which may include the regulation of financial service suppliers.  
 3.  If the Director- General of the WTO or the Secretary General of the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration is responsible for appointing a panellist pursuant to pa ragraph 7  or paragraph 8  of Article 30 .9 (Establishment and 
Reconvening of Panels – Dispute Settlement ), the Parties shall request that 
the appointing authority appoint a panellist who meets the requirements set out in paragraph 2.9 - 24 
 
 4.  Further to  paragraph 5 of Article 30.16 (Temporary Remedies for Non-
Compliance – Dispute Settlement) , in considering what obligations to 
suspend the complaining Party shall apply the following principles. If the 
measure affects:  
 
(a)  the financial services sector and any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend obligations in the financial services sector that do not exceed a level equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment in the complaining Party’s financial services sector; or  
 (b)  only a sector other than the financial services sector, the complaining Party shall not suspend obligations in the financial services sector.  
  
Article 9.24 
Financial Services Regulatory Cooperation 
 
The Parties shall promote and seek to further develop regulatory 
cooperation in financial services in accordance with Annex 9C  (Financial 
Services Regulatory  Cooperation).9A - 1 
 ANNEX 9A  
Cross- Border Trade in Financial Services  
 
Australia  
Insurance and insurance- related services  
1.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in Australia’s commitments,  
Articles 9.5 (National Treatment),  9.6 (Market Access) and 9.7 (Local 
Presence)  apply to the cross -border supply or trade in financial services, as 
defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border supply of 
financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a)  insurance of risks relating to:  
(i)  maritim e shipping and commercial aviation and space 
launching and freight (including satellites), with such 
insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being 
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods and any 
liability arising therefrom;  
(ii)  goods in international transit; 
(iii)  credit and suretyship;  
(iv)  land vehicles; 
(v)  fire and natural forces;  
(vi)  other damage to property; 
(vii)  motor vehicle liability, except in relation to any liability 
which, in accordance with domestic law, must be insured by 
an insurer who is authorised under such laws; 
(viii)  general liability;  
(ix)  miscellaneous financial loss;  
(x)  difference in conditions and difference in limits, where the difference in conditions or difference in limits cover is provide d under a master policy issued by an insurer to cover 
risks across multiple jurisdictions;  
(b)  reinsurance and retrocession;  
(c)  insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of financial ser vice in Article 
9.1 (Definitions), of insurance risks related to the services listed in 
subparagraphs (a) and (b); and9A - 2 
 (d)  services auxiliary to insurance as described in subparagraph (d) of the 
definition of financial service in Article 9.1 (Definitions).  
2.  Paragraph 1 does not permit suppliers of the services listed in subparagraphs 1(a)(iii) through (x) to provide these  services to a retail client.  
3.  For the purposes of the commitments made in subparagraphs 1(a)(iii)  
through(x), for Australia, “retail client” means: 
  (a)  a natural person; or  
(b)  a small business as defined under section 761G(12) of the 
Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) .  
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)  
4.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in Australia’s commitments,
 
Articles 9.5 (National Treatment), 9.6 (Market Access) and 9.7 (Local 
Presence) apply to the cross- border supply or trade in financial services, as 
defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border supply of 
financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a)  the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data 
processing and related software, as described in subparagraph (o) of 
the definition of banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions);  
(b)  advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other financial services, as described in subparagraph (p) of the definition of banking and other financial services (excludin g 
insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions), but not intermediation as 
described in that subparagraph; 
(c)  securities related transactions on a wholesale basis between and among financial institutions and other entities; and 
(d)  portfolio management servic es by a financial service supplier  of the 
United Kingdom to:  
(i)  a collective investment vehicle or management company of such a vehicle;  
(ii)  insurance companies; and  
(iii)  pension funds and management companies of such funds.  
5.  For the purposes of the commitment made in paragraph 4(d), for Australia:9A - 3 
 (a)  collective investment scheme22 means a “managed investment 
scheme” as defined under Section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001 
(Cth) , other than a managed investment scheme operated in 
contravention of Subsection 601ED (5) of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) , or an entity that: 
(i)  carries on a business of investment in securities, interests in 
land, or other investments; and 
(ii)  in the course of carrying on that business, invests funds 
subscribed, whether directly or indirectly, after an offer or invitation to the public (within the meaning of Section 82 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) ) made on terms that the funds 
subscribed w ould be invested; 
 
(b)  portfolio management services to a collective investment scheme 
located in the Area of Australia, exclude:  
(i)  custodial services23 and execution services that are not related 
to managing a collective investment scheme; and  
(ii)  trustee services. 
6.  For greater certainty, p aragraph 4 does not permit suppliers of the services 
listed in subparagraphs 4(d)(i) through ( iii) to provide these services  to a retail 
client.  
7.  For the purposes of the  commitments made  in paragraph 4(d)(i) through (iii), 
for Australia, “retail client” means a person who is defined as a retail client under section 761G of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)  and is not excluded 
from being a retail client under section 761GA of the Corporations Act 2001 
(Cth) . 
 
                                                            
22 For greater certainty, a Party may require a collective investment sch eme or a person of a Party 
involved in the operation of the scheme located in the Party’s territory to retain ultimate 
responsibility for the management of the collective investment scheme.  
23 Custodial services are included in paragraph (d) only with respect to investments for which the 
primary market is outside of the territory of Australia.9A - 4 
 United Kingdom  
Insurance and insurance- related services  
1.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in the United Kingdom’s  
commitments,  Articles 9.5 (National Treatment), 9.6 (Market Access) and 
9.7 (Local Presence)  apply to the cross- border supply or trade in financial 
services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border 
supply of financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a)  insurance of risks relating to :24 
 
(i)  maritime shipping a nd commercial aviation and space 
launching and freight (including satellites), with such 
insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods and any liability arising therefrom;  
 (ii)  goods in in ternational transit;  
 (iii)  credit and suretyship;  
 
(iv)  land vehicles; 
 
(v)  fire and natural forces;  
 (vi)  other damage to property; 
 (vii)  motor vehicle liability, except in relation to any liability which, in accordance with domestic law, must be insured by an insurer who is authorised under such laws; 
 
(viii)  general liability;  
 
(ix)  miscellaneous financial loss;  
 (x)  difference in conditions and difference in limits, where the 
difference in conditions or difference in limits cover is 
provided under a master policy issued by an insurer to cover 
risks across multiple jurisdictions;  
 
(b)  reinsurance and retrocession;  
                                                            
24For greater certainty, insurance activities in the categories mentioned in subparagraphs 1(a)(iii)  
through (x) are included in the scope of the commitments only where a supplier is carrying on that 
insurance business entirely outside that Party’s territory.9A - 5 
  
(c)  insurance intermediation , such as brokerage and agency, as referred 
to in subparagraph ( c) of the definition of financial service in Article 
9.1 (Definitions), of insurance risks related to the services listed in 
subparagraphs (a) and (b); and 
 
(d)  services auxiliary to insurance as described in subparagraph ( d) of the 
definition of financial service in Article 9.1 (Definitions).  
 
2.  Paragraph 1 does not permit suppliers of the services listed in subparagraphs 
1(a)(iii) through (x) to provide these  services to a retail client.  
3.  In this Annex, for the United Kingdom, “retail client” means: 
(a)  a natural person; or  
(b)  an enterprise which satisfies two or more of the requirements 
specified in section 465(3) of the Companies Act 2006.  
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) 
4.  Subject to any limitations set out elsewhere in the United Kingdom’s 
commitments,  Articles 9.5 (National Treatment), 9.6 (Market Access) and 
9.7 (Local Presence)  apply to the cross -border supply or trade in financial 
services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross -border 
supply of financial services in Article 9.1 (Definitions) with respect to:  
(a) the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data 
processing and related software, as described in subparagraph ( o) of 
the definition of banking and other financial services (excluding 
insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions);  
 (b)  advisory and other auxiliary financial service s relating to banking and 
other financial services, as described in subparagraph ( p) of the 
definition of banking and other financial services (excluding 
insurance) in Article 9.1 (Definitions), but not intermediation as 
described in that subparagraph; and 
(c)  portfolio management services by a financial service supplier of Australia to:  
(i) a collective investment vehicle or management company of such a vehicle;  
(ii) insurance companies; and  
(iii) pension funds and management companies of such funds.  
5.  For the purposes of the commitment made in paragraph 4 (c), for the United 
Kingdom :  
(a) a collective investment vehicle means:9A - 6 
 (i)  a collective investment scheme as defined in section 235 of 
the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000; or  
(ii)  an alternative investment fund as defined in regulation 3 of the 
Alternative Investment Fund Managers Regulations 2013;   
(b)  portfolio management means managing portfolios in accordance with 
mandates given by clients on a discretionary client -by-client b asis 
where such portfolios include one or more financial instruments; and 
 
(c)  portfolio management services do not include:  
(i)  custodial services;  
(ii)  trustee services; or  
(iii)  execution services.9B - 1 
 ANNEX 9B  
 
 
Authorities Responsible for Financial Services  
  
The authorities responsible for financial services for each Party are:  
 
(a)  for Australia, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade or its successor and the Department of the Treasury  or its successor ; and 
 (b)  for the United Kingdom, H er M ajesty’s  Treasury or its successor.9C - 1 
 ANNEX 9 C 
 
Financial Services Regulatory Cooperation 
 
 
Article 9C.1 
Objectives of Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  The Parties recognise that promoting cooperation between the Parties and their financial regulatory authorities  supports several  objectives including: 
 
(a)  enhancing financial services trade and investment between the 
Parties; 
 (b)  strengthening  financial systems and  promoting financial stability;  
 (c)  improving market integrity and  countering undesirable market 
fragmentation; 
 (d)  promoting fair and competitive markets;  
 (e)  promoting robust and efficient  financial service suppliers, markets, 
and infrastructure;  
 (f)  protecting  consumers, investors, depositors,  policy holders and 
persons to whom a fiduciary and / or statutory duty is owed by a 
financial service su pplier; and 
 (g)  providing a transparent and predictable environment for financial 
service suppliers . 
 2.  The Parties shall  wherever practicable work together bilaterally and in 
international bodies to achieve the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 (hereinafter referred to in this Annex as “regulatory  cooperation”). 
 3.  The Parties shall , wherever practicable , base their regulatory cooperation on 
the principles and prudential standards agreed at the international level where  
applicable
25 and follow the principles  set out in Article 9C.3 (Principles of 
Regulatory Cooperation), as implemented in the framework developed in 
accordance with  Article 9C.5 (Framework for Regulatory Cooperation). 
 4.  This Annex is without prejudice to the right of a Party to determine its own appropriate level of prudential regulation, including the establishment  and 
enforcement  of measures that provide a higher level of prudential protection 
than those set out in internationally agreed standards. 
                                                            
25 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Annex,  standards adopted by international standard -
setting bodies to which both Parties' relevant competent authorities have agreed and in which both 
Parties participate may be considered as internationally agreed standards.9C - 2 
  
 
Article 9C.2  
Scope of Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  Regulatory cooperation between the Parties shall cover all areas of financial services, as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions), unless the Parties agree otherwise.  
 2.  Article 26.2 (General Provision – Good Regulatory Practice), Article 26.6 
(Public Consultation –  Good Regulatory Practice), Article 26.10 (Regulatory 
Cooperation – Good Regulatory Practice) and Article 26.11 ( Contact Points  
– Good Regulatory Practice ) do not apply to any matter covered by this 
Annex. 
 3.  The provisions of this Annex shall be without prejudice to the distribution and exercise of the duties of the regulatory and supervisory authorities of the Parties, in line with their statutory objectives. The Parties recognise that their regulatory cooper ation in financial services should be based on due 
consideration of each Party’s legislative and regulatory autonomy and 
differences in legislative and regulatory frameworks, market  structures and 
in the range of business models that may exist between the Parties.  
  
Article 9C.3 
Principles of Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  Mutual Compatibility of Regulatory and Supervisory Frameworks   
(a)  The Parties shall, wherever practicable, work to achieve mutual compatibility of their respective regulatory and supervisory frameworks for financial services in areas of common interest in a way that supports the objectives set out in Article 9C.1 (Objectives of 
Regulatory Cooperation). That work may include developing 
consistent regulatory approaches on an outcomes basis and reducing unnecessarily burdensome, duplicative or divergent regulatory requirements.  
 (b)  As the basis for pursuing the mutual com patibility referred to in 
subparagraph (a), each Party shall use its best endeavours to ensure that internationally agreed standards for regulation and supervision in the area of financial services are implemented and applied in its territory.  
 (c)  To su pport regulatory cooperation, the Parties shall, wherever 
practicable, work together in international standard -setting bodies to 
develop effective international standards and facilitate coherent implementation.9C - 3 
  
2.  Regulatory Deference   
 
The Parties shall, wherever  agreeable and in accordance with their respective 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks, defer to the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the other Party. The foregoing shall be without prejudice to each Party’s legislative and regulatory autonomy and right to assess, on the basis of its own frameworks, the frameworks of the other Party, including the effective enforcement of those frameworks, with a view to 
establishing deference. For the purposes of any such assessment, a Party  shall 
not require that the other Party’s regulatory and supervisory frameworks are identical to its own frameworks but shall base its assessment on regulatory outcomes. 
 3.  Sharing of Information    
(a)  Without prejudice to its own domestic processes, e ach Party shall use 
its best endeavours to inform the other Party and provide the other Party with adequate opportunity for comment when it consults on new regulatory initiatives , proposed measures or actual measures in the 
area of financial services that may be of relevance to that other Party.  
 (b) In the areas where one of the Parties defers to the regulatory and supervisory framework of the other Party, the Parties shall keep each other informed of how they provide for effective implementation and enforcement of regulatory and supervisory frameworks, consult on 
changes to the regulatory or supervisory framework, and ensure appropriate mechanisms are in place for the ongoing exchange of information on supervision and enforcement.  
 (c)  If a Party conclu des negotiations for an agreement or arrangement as 
described in Article 9.20 (Recognition of Prudential Measures) with 
a non-party, the Party shall directly notify the other Party to this Agreement and, upon conclusion of the aforementioned negotiations, provide adequate opportunity to that Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement or to negotiate a comparable agreement 
or arrangement.  
 4.  Review of Impact   
 
(a)  A Party shall, in the process of formulating its planned regulatory or supervisory initiatives, in the areas of financial services where that Party defers to the regulatory and supervisory framework of the other Party, give due consideration to the impact of those initiatives on its decision to defer to the other Party's regulatory and supervisory frameworks.9C - 4 
 (b)  Each Party shall review a measure which has been brought to its 
attention by a specific written request of the other Party which 
identifies the measure as having an impact on the ability of the other Party’s financial service suppliers to provide financial services within the first Party’s territory. Any requests for review shall only be mad e 
where the impact is material and shall include a clear explanation of the impact of the measure and its materiality. Any review shall consider whether and to what extent the measure may be rendered mutually compatible.  
 (c)  The Party shall respond to the request in writing, and within a reasonable period of time.   
  
Article 9C.4 
Joint Financial Regulatory Forum 
 1.  The Parties hereby establish a Joint Financial Regulatory Forum (hereinafter referred to in this Annex as the “Forum”).     
 2.  The Forum shall serve as a platform to facilitate regulatory cooperation between the Parties so as to achieve the objectives set out in Article 9C.1 
(Objectives of Regulatory Cooperation) . The Forum shall observe the 
principles of regulatory cooperation laid out in Article 9C.3 (Principles of 
Regulatory Cooperation)  and implemented in the framework referred to in 
Article 9C.5 (Framework for Regulatory Cooperation). 
 3.  The meetings of the Forum shall be held  annually, unless the Parties agree 
otherwise, and whenever  the Parties consider it expedient or necessary  giving 
consideration to existing regulatory relationships and communications. 
 4.  The Forum shall be composed of representatives of Australia and the United 
Kingdom, including:  
 
(a)  for Australia, the Department of  the Treasury, Australian Prudential 
Regulation Authority, Australian Securities and Investments Commission and the Reserve Bank of Australia and other agencies as relevant to the matters under discussion, and any of their successors, which ha ve, at technical level, responsibility for financial services 
regulatory issues ; and  
 (b)  for the United Kingdom, Her Majesty’s Treasury, the Bank of 
England and the Financial Conduct Authority, and any of their successors which have, at technical level,  responsibility for financial 
services regulatory issues.    
 5.  Without prejudice to the right of each Party to decide on the composition of its representation in the Forum, each Party may request that the other Party9C - 5 
 invite representatives with relevant seniority or expertise from other financial 
regulatory or supervisory authorities.  This is with a view to contributing to 
the Forum's discussions and preparatory work in matters related to the 
activity of those financial regulatory or supervisory authorit ies, or the 
objectives of regulatory cooperation, as set out in Article 9C.1 (Objectives of 
Regulatory Cooperation) .  
 6.  The meetings of the Forum will be co -chaired by senior officials from the 
Department of  the Treasury  of Australia and Her Majesty’s Treasury of the 
United Kingdom, or their respective successors.   
 7.  Each co -chair shall designate a specific contact point to facilitate the work of 
the Forum.  
 8.  The Forum may establish expert sub -working groups to examine specific 
issues or explore cooperation in specific areas of financial services.  
  
Article 9C.5 
Framework for Regulatory Cooperation 
 1.  The Forum shall develop a framework for improving regulatory cooperation.  
The framework will be guided by the principles set out in Article 9C.3 
(Principles of Regulatory Cooperation).  
 2.  The framework for regulatory cooperation shall include:  
(a)  without prejudice to each Party's own legislative and administrative processes, mechanisms for information exchange and consultation with the other Party, in appropriate forms giving consideration to existing communication processes;  
 (b)  guidelines to enhance regulatory cooperation between the Parties 
including guidelines for any expert sub- working groups established 
under paragraph 8 of Article 9C.4 (Joint Financial Regulatory 
Forum) .  These guidelines may cover different forms of regulatory 
cooperation, including deference to each other’s regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks or implementation of international standards  
in specific mutually agreed areas; 
 (c)  a procedure for reviewing the measures referred to in subparagraph 4(b) of Article 9C.3 (Principles of Regulatory Cooperation);  
 (d)  terms of reference and guidelines on the governance of the Forum; and  
 (e)  if so agreed, any other arrangements to enhance regulatory cooperation.9C - 6 
  
3.  The framework for regulatory cooperation may also envisage specific 
arrangements to facilitate cooperation in cross -border supervision and 
enforcement.  
  
Article 9C.6 
Mediation  
 1.  The Parties shall act in good faith to try to resolve any disputes arising under this Annex.  
 2.  The Parties shall make all  reasonable efforts to resolve any disputes arising 
under this Annex at working- level . 
  
Article 9C.7 
Termination of Deference 
 1.  A Party may rescind its decision to defer to the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the other Party in a specific area of financial services and revert to the application and enforcement of its own regulatory and supervisory frameworks in circumstances such as, but not exclusively, where:  
 
(a)  the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the other Party are no longer equivalent in outcome;  
 (b)  the other Party fails to enforce its regulatory and supervisory frameworks effectively; or  
 (c)  there is insufficient cooperation, including sharing of information, of the other Party in the areas set out under paragraph 3 of Article 9C.3 
(Principles of Regulatory Cooperation). 
 
2.  Prior to taking a decision to rescind pursuant to paragraph 1, a Party shall give written notification of its intention to rescind to the other Party.  Following receipt of the notification, the Parties shall consult with each other within a reasonable tim eframe which shall not exceed six months, and which 
may include mediation pursuant to Article 9C.6 (Mediation). 
 3.  Following publication of the decision by a Party to rescind deference, that Party shall accord the other Party a reasonable period of time prior to reverting to the application and enforcement of their own regulatory and supervisory frameworks, including sufficient time to: 
 
(a)  enable financial service suppliers to apply for, and have their application determined in respect of the necessary authorisations in the jurisdiction of the Party terminating deference; and9C - 7 
  
(b) pass provisions protecting the acquired rights of financial service suppliers that entered into force prior to the decision to rescind deference.  
  
Article 9C.8 
Emerging Issues  
 1.  To support innovation in the areas  of financial services, the Parties shall : 
 
(a)  endeavour to collaborate, share knowledge, experiences and developments in financial services and facilitate the cross-border development of new financial services; 
 (b)  promote and encourage cooperation relating to innovative financial 
services,
26 through their respective trade promotion agencies and 
regulators, and encourage  enterprises undertaking innovative 
financial services to use facilities and assistance available in the other 
Party’s territory  to explore new business opportunities; 
 (c)  encourage relevant  competent authorities to cooperate  in relevant 
international fora to improve opportunities for each Party’s  
enterprises  undertaking innovative financial services; 
 (d)  endeavour to cooperate on the development of regulation and 
standards for open banking; and 
 (e)  endeavour to cooperate on the development of underpinning technologies for innovative financial services . 
 
2.  The Parties may  share best practices to promote diversity27 in financial 
services and  recognise the importance of building a diverse, including 
gender- balanced, financial services industry, and the positive impact that 
diversity has on balanced decision -making, consumers, workplace culture, 
investment, and competitive markets. 
 
Article 9 C.9 
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
 
Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 
30 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Annex. 
 
                                                            
26 Innovative financial services includes FinTech and financial services -related RegTech activities 
which involve the improved use of tec hnology across financial services.  
27 Diversity includes gender, ethnicity, and professional and educational background.